
  Literature Review


    Towards The Holy Mountain of the Dissertation


      Go to live form here
      <https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScijqg1IlmAWLsBgQ7jaUxEcCPUQqZroXG-9ZxXV4BvOKzbKg/viewform>

# Actor-Network Theory <#actor-network_theory> |
# Aesthetics <#aesthetics> |
# Agency <#agency> |
# Authorship <#authorship> |
# Changes in Technology, Social, Global Context
<#changes_in_technology,_social,_global_context> |
# Conceptual Art <#conceptual_art> |
# Crisis <#crisis> |
# Data <#data> |
# Database <#database> |
# Image <#image> |
# Installation <#installation> |
# Interaction <#interaction> |
# Intermedia <#intermedia> |
# Listening <#listening> |
# Multimedia <#multimedia> |
# New Media Theory <#new_media_theory> |
# Open-Source <#open-source> |
# Software <#software> |
# Sonification <#sonification> |
# Sound <#sound> |
# Stochastics <#stochastics> |
# Tensegrity <#tensegrity> |
# Visual Art <#visual_art> |
# Work <#work> |
# Aesthetics <#aesthetics> |
# Archive <#archive> |
# Différance <#différance> |
# Repetition <#repetition> |
# Writing <#writing> |
# Work <#work> |


      Quotes


        Actor-Network Theory

    "Building on the semiotic turn, AT first brackets out society and
    nature to consider only meaning-productions; then breaking with the
    limits of semiotics without losing its tool box, it grants activity
    to the semiotic actors turning them into a new ontological hybrid,
    world making entities; by doing such a counter-copernican revolution
    it builds a completely empty frame for describing how any entity
    builds its world; finally, it retains from the descriptive project
    only a very few terms -its infralanguage- which are just enough to
    sail in between frames of reference and grants back to the actors
    themselves the ability to build precise accounts of one another by
    the very way they behave; the goal building of an overarching
    explanation -that is, for AT, a centre of calculation that would
    hold or replace or ponctualise all the others- is displaced by the
    search for ex- plications that is for the deployment of as many
    elements as possible accounted for through as many metalanguages as
    possible. "[33] <#eID33>

    "there is an actor whose definition of the world outlines, traces,
    delineate, limn, describe, shadow forth, inscroll, file, list,
    record, mark, or tag a trajectory that is called a network. No net
    exists independently of the very act of tracing it, and no tracing
    is done by an actor exterior to the net. A network is not a thing
    but the recorded movement of a thing. "[33] <#eID33>

    "The surface “in between” networks is either connected -but then the
    network is expanding- or non-existing. Literally, a network has no
    outside. "[33] <#eID33>


        Aesthetics

    "The curators promoting this 'laboratory' ['white cube'] paradigm
    ... have to a large extent been ecouraged to adopt this curatorial
    modus operandi as a direct reaction to the type of art produced in
    the 1990s: work that is open-ended, interactive, and resistant to
    closure, often appearing to be 'work-in-progress' rather thatn a
    completed object. Such work seems to derive from a creative
    misreading of poststructuralist theory: rather thatn the
    /interpretations/ of a work of art being open to continual
    reassessment, the work of art /itself/ is argued to be in perpetual
    flux. ... An effect of this insistent promotion of these ideas of
    artist-as-designer, function over contemplation, and open-endedness
    over aesthetic resolution is often ultimately to enhance the status
    of the curator, who gains credit for stage-managing the overall
    laboratory experience. As Hal Foster warned in the mid-1990s, "the
    institiution may overshadow the work that it otherwise highlights:
    it becomes the spectacle, it collects the cultural capital, and the
    director-curator becomes the star" (Foster: The Artist as
    Ethnographer, 1996) "[8] <#eID8>

    "Bourriaud argues that art of the 1990s takes as its theoretical
    horizon "the realm of human interactions and its social context,
    rather than the assertion of an independent and /private/ symbolic
    space" (ra,.p14). ... relational art works seek to establish
    intersubjective encounters(be these literal or potential) in which
    meaning is elaborated (p.18) rather than in the privatized space of
    individual consumption. The implication is that this work inverses
    the goals of Greenbergian modernism. Rather than a discrete,
    portable, autonomous work of art that transcends its context,
    relational art is entirely beholden to the contingencies of its
    environment and audience. Moreover, this audience is envisaged as a
    community: rather than a one-to-one relationship between work of art
    and viewer, relational art sets up situations in which viewers are
    not just addressed as as collective, social entity, but are actually
    given the wherewithal to create a community, however temporary or
    utopian this may be. "[8] <#eID8>

    "Bourriaud does not regard relational aesthetics to be simply a
    theory of interactive art. He considers it to be a means of locating
    contemporary practive within the culture at large: relational art is
    seen as a direct response to the shift from goods to a service-based
    economy. It is also seen as a response to the virtual relationships
    of the Internet and globalization, which on the one hand have
    prompted a desire for more physical and face-to-face interaction
    between people, while on the other have inspired artists to adopt a
    do-it-yourself (DIY) approach and model their own 'possible
    universes' (ra,p.13)... instead of a 'utopian' agenda, today's
    artists seek only to find provisional solutions in the here and now;
    instead of trying to change their environment, artists today are
    simply 'learning to inhabit the world in a better way'; instead of
    looking forward to a future utopia, this art sets up functioning
    'microtopias' in the presend (ra.p13). Burriaud summarizes this new
    attitude vividly in one sentence: "It seems more pressing to invent
    possible relations with our neighbors in the present than to bet on
    happier tomorrows: (ra.p45). This DIY, microtopian ethos is what
    Bourriaud perceives to be the core political significance of
    relational aesthetics. "[8] <#eID8>

    " Arendt’s rethinking of praxis is related to the more immediate
    task of delimiting the space of the political as the public realm in
    which human beings can act in concert in order to define themselves
    in historical terms. "[45] <#eID45>

    "For Arendt, the term ‘public’ refers to the world itself, which can
    be related to all of the enduring artifacts fabricated by human
    hands and the many affairs that compose human experience. "[45] <#eID45>

It has been claimed that Aesthetics is a consequence of the plasticity
of the brain. In this line of thought, the history of aesthetics is an
uncontious dialogue between the evolution of neurobiological structures
and the changing cultural scene.

    "Aesthetics has two 'modus operandi'. First, it constructs what is
    outside the brain into packages of information that can be understoo
    drapidly and efficiently. It does so by creating and recreating
    networks that can be appreciated as an ensemble, and whose
    assemblage is dictated by the proclivities of the neurobiological
    apparatus. That is to say that the connections between objects,
    their relations, and the spaces they occupy are arrangedd spatially
    and temporally according to the prescribed architectonic
    arrangements of neural networks in the brain. The history of
    aesthetics is partly an unconscious dialogue between the evolving
    neurobiological structures and the mutating cultural/visual
    landscape. In this way aesthetics can be seen to be 'ergonomically'
    activating. Aesthetcis constructs and organizes the visual landscape
    according to prescribed rules that are tuned to specific abilities
    of the human nervous system, allowing it to respond with greater
    efficiency. ... the nervous system has been sculpted by certain
    political, historical, psychological, and social relations that form
    homologous interdititated ensembles of coherent meaning. Aesthetic
    production, being as it is an output of that inscribed
    neurobiological structure, will reflect that condition. "[50] <#eID50>

    "In the most general sense of progessive thought, the Enlightenment
    has always aimed at liberating men from fear and establishing their
    sovereignty. Yet the fully enlighened earth radiates disaster
    triumphant. The program of the Enlightenment was the disenchantment
    of the world; the dissolution of myths and the substitution of
    knowledge for fancy. "[28] <#eID28>

    "In order to go beyond this slight degree of originality, other
    functions would have to be created, or no functions should exist at
    all. One is therefore obliged to conceive of forms from thoughts
    bearing no relation to the preceeding ones, thoughts without limits
    of shapes and without end. "[73] <#eID73>

    "I wanted to do away with all of the inherited rules of composition
    in order to create new ones. But the question that came to my mind
    at that time [1958] was wether a music could still have meaning even
    if it was not built on rules of occurence. In other words, void of
    rules... I had temporarily resolved this problem in creating music
    uniquely through the help of probability distributions. I say
    'temporarily' since each probability function has its own finality
    and therefore is not a nothing. "[73] <#eID73>

    "For Hegel, the difference between what a thing is and how it
    appears is internal to the subject, which in the largest sense for
    him is Geist, that magical Slinky that can go up stairs all the way
    to the top, where the Prussian state hangs out. "[47] <#eID47>

    "We will disarm Heidegger from within. It's not that there is no
    such thing as world, but that /world/ is always and necessarily
    incomplete. Worlds are always cheap. And this is because of the
    special non-explosively holist interconnectedness that is the
    symbiotic real; and because of what OOO calls 'object withdrawal,'
    the way in which no access mode whatsoever can totally swallow an
    entity. 'Withdrawn' doesn't mean empirically shrunken back or moving
    behind; it means -and this is why I now sometimes say 'open' instead
    of 'withdrawn'- /so in your face that you can't see it/. "[47] <#eID47>

Spectrality

    "What we encounter in the case of correlationism surprise mode is
    the specter of paranormal action. Distilled into its most basic
    form, what is haunting communism is the specter of spectrality
    itself. Why? Because spectrality is the flavor of the symbiotic
    real, where everything is what it is, yet nothing coincides exactly
    with itself. Communist thought needs to embrace the spectral and
    figure out exactly what comprises it: not spirits in the divine
    realm, even if that realm has been relocated in the human -that's
    the concept of Humanity. /Spectrality is nonhumans/, including the
    'nonhuman' aspect of ourselves. "[47] <#eID47>

Paranoia > Empathy

    "One surprising conclusion we can draw now is that /paranoia is a
    possibility condition for empathy/. It's counterintuitive, but we
    can only conclude that empathy becomes distorted when it assumes
    that there is a definite person over there with definite shoes I can
    definitely walk in. What empathy requires is the energy of
    /solidarity/, vibrating away in the basement -I join with you even
    though I can't check in advance whether there is a /you/ there.
    "[47] <#eID47>

The new logic imposed by the so called "information society" is
evidenced in today's cultural globalization, and it attempts to blur
cultural specificity arriving at a "global style".

    "It is my strong feeling that the emerging information aesthetics
    (i.e., the new cultural features specific to the information
    society) already have or will have a very different logic from
    modernism. The latter was driven by a strong desire to erase the
    old, a desire visible as much in the avant-garde artists'
    (particularly the futurists') statements that museums should be
    burned as in the dramatic destruction of all social and spiritual
    realities of many people in Russia after the 1917 Revolution, and in
    other countries after they became Soviet satellites after 1945.
    Culturally and ideologically, modernists wanted to start with a
    tabula rasa, radically distancing themselves from the past. ...
    Today we fcace the very real danger of being imprisoned by a new
    international style, something we can call the new 'global style'.
    the cultural globalizzation, of which cheap airline flight, the Web,
    and billions of mobile phones are three most visible manifetations,
    erases some dimension of the cultural specificityuy with an energy
    and speed impossible fo modernism. "[38] <#eID38>

    "[Ranciere] proposes ... that the aesthetic and the political occupy
    different 'communities of sense', and that far from being isolated
    from other dimensions of thought such as politics, aesthetics must
    instead be viewed ass simutaneously encompasssing 'both a
    historically specific mode of identification of art and the forms of
    visibility and speech in which politics is necessarily staged'.
    Following Schiller, Ranciere describes the aesthetic experience as
    one of 'play in which meaning and ense are neither tethered to each
    other, nor existing in a relationship of domination, thus allowing
    for the potential of a redistribution of the sensible. Politics and
    aesthetics are not only ineparable, but the political can be
    considered a version of an aesthetic mode, not unlike theater, where
    its subjects are called into being though the partitioning of
    senses. ... political art in the modern epoc is therefore not a
    negotiation between art and politics, but a 'third way' that
    continuously plays 'on the boundary and the absence of boundary
    beween art and non-art'... [Ranciere charts a] progression from
    dialectical clash to wards one of hyper-objectification, of
    'consensus', making the weakening of the political stage where
    dispues are visible. [Ranciere] proposes an art that would
    'challenge the existing distribution of the real and the fictional',
    inventing 'new forms of aesthetic distance or indifference' to
    frame, reshape, and activate alternative political communities of
    sense. "[30] <#eID30>

    "A multiscale approach to composition allows for compositional
    intervention on every time scale. the power of this approach comes
    from the fahat different temporal zones interconnect. Operations on
    one time scale generate structures which may be perceived on other
    time scales.... For some composers, part of the attraction of
    composing with microsound is the way it blurs the levels of musical
    structure: 'the task of microcompositional strategies can be
    described as one of letting global morphological properties of
    musical structure emerge from the local conditions in the sonic
    matter (di scipio, 1994)' In an approach that favors 'emergent
    properties' or second-order sonorities, sound objects emerge from a
    composer's manipulations of microstructural processes... this is
    also known as a bottom-up compositional strategy, since the
    composition takes its shape from microsonic interactions. This
    stands in contrast to a top-down strategy in which a composer fills
    in a preplanned form (e.g., sonata). The bottom-up strategy can be
    fascinating, partly because its results cannot always be predicted
    in advance. On the other hand, why limit the scope of compositional
    decisions to a single time scale? To navigate the widest possible
    zone of creativity, the creative composer wants to float freely
    across time scale boundaries. To insert, delete, rearrange, or mold
    sounds on any time scale, this is the multiscale approach to
    composition. "[56] <#eID56>

    "IRCAM embodies Boulez's ambitious vision for advancing the future
    of music... According to Boulez, the basic aims of IRCAM are to
    bring music, science, and technology into a new kind of
    collaborative dialogue in order to produce research and technologies
    that will aid the process of musical composition. "[10] <#eID10>

    "The first motive has been to pursue resea that might provide
    insight into the sense of crisis in late-twentieth-century
    composition, and in particular into the crisis of musical
    modernism.... Central to this was the extension of serialist
    techniques and their interdependence with a growing resort to
    electronic media and scientistic theory.... This was the epitome of
    a high modernism, founded on a belief in the possibility of a total,
    deep-structural, and scientistic renewal of the grounds of musical
    progress.... Boulez's thought, his writins, teachings, and polemics
    have stood as a beacon of certainty... with increased vigor since
    the early 1970s, there has been a split within the world of serious
    composition between, loosely, the advocates of scientistic
    postserialism and its critics and dissenters, the latter the
    proponents of various forms of postmodernist aesthetic and
    composition.... [there was the] chronic sense of impasse,the
    profound doubt and loss of confidence, that have accompanied this
    split, especially for those many composers who hav experienced a
    disenchangment with the high-modernist project and with the
    perceived failures of serialism. The sense of a threat to the
    continued existence of western art music has, despite certain
    differences, been widespread in both Europe and the United States.
    "[10] <#eID10>

    "Babbit's 1958 article, "The composer as specialist" (originally
    entitled "Who cares if you listen?") argued that contemporary music
    had become such a complex area of theoretical enquiry that it was
    necessarily unintelligible to the layman. To secure the future
    evolution of music, it must therefore withdraw from the public and
    find support and protection, like the sciences, within the
    universities... [for] Rochberg... ["Music: science vs.
    humanism",1971] ... the conversion of music into a "new form of
    applied science" and the missaplication of dehumanized theories and
    technologies would surely lead to the demise of music as we have
    known it. Both positions, then, employed a "rhetoric of survival"
    (McClary 1989, 62) wchich implied that the continuity of western art
    music was at stake. "[10] <#eID10>

    "Art is a social product.This book attempts to show systematically
    the vaiuous ways in which the arts can adequately be understood only
    in a sociological perspective. It argues against the romatinc and
    mystical notion of art as the creation of 'genius', transcending
    existence, society and time, and argues that it is rather the
    complex construction of a number of real, historical factors. ...
    theories of the reception of art.... integrated with theories of
    artistic production... production and consumption must be seen as
    complementary... A central theme throughtout this book will be the
    question of creativ ity (ch.1)... opposition of 'structure' and
    'creativity' ...nytyak ubterdeoebdebce,,,The relationship between
    individiual subject/actors on the one hand, and
    social/idoelogical/economic structures on the other, can no longer
    be disposed of in the relatively simple way that either a Weberian
    or a Durkeimian position proposes. In particular, any humnaistic
    notion of an 'essential' individual, pre-existing social
    experience(language, interpersonal relations, ideological influcence
    and induction, and the socia and material structures underlying all
    these) must be abandoned... tthe most radically antihumanist
    positions appear to want to do away with any cateogry of
    'subjectivity' or 'agency'.... (ch1, ch6,conclusion)... it is wrong
    to posit artistic practice as somehow enbtirely different from any
    other kind of human practice; otoh, the fact that the problem of
    subjectivity has been posed most forcefully, and most fully
    elaborated, in the analysis of culture (as well as in feminist
    theory and the analysis of patriarchy) means that sociology in
    general can benefit from the work already done in these areas...
    "[72] <#eID72>

    "Historicism contents itself with establishing a causal connection
    between various moments in history. But no fact that is a cause is
    for that very reason historical. It became historical posthumously,
    as it were, through events that may be separated from it by
    thousands of years. A historian who takes this as his point of
    departure stops telling the sequence of events like the beads of a
    rosary. Instead, he graps the constellation which his own era has
    formed with a definite earlier one. Thus he establishes a conception
    of the present as the 'time of the now' which is shot through with
    chips of Messianic time. "[7] <#eID7>


        Agency

    "Es entonces interesante pensar en la composición con nuevos medios
    no como un proceso individual y vertical sino como un proceso de
    diálogo constante con las personas y los medios o tecnologías que
    nos rodean. No en la tecnología como un ente pasivo que controlamos,
    sino como un agente que propone y al cual respondemos en un ciclo de
    retroalimentación constante. "[51] <#eID51>

    "The computer age brought with it a new cultural algorithm:
    reality->media->data->data- base. ... As a cultural form, database
    represents the world as a list of items, and it refuses to order
    this list. In contrast, a narrative creates a cause-and-effect
    trajectory of seemingly unordered items (events). Therefore,
    database and narrative are natural enemies. "[39] <#eID39>

    "[Vertov's cinematic techniques] are motivated by a particular
    argument, this being that the new techniques to obtain images and
    manipulate them, summed up by Vertov in his term “kino-eye,” can be
    used to decode the world. "[39] <#eID39>

    "Together, STS and ANT provided an important counter to the almost
    religious rhetoric of cyberspace and virtual reality that played a
    large role in critical cyberculture studies and early new media
    theory. In the enthusiasm of the emergence of cyberculture in the
    ’80s and ’90s, Latour’s actor-network model provided a theory of
    translation with which to understand the transformative relations
    among textual and material mediations, human and non- human actors.
    Coupled with the insights of earlier nonhuman theo- rists like
    Walter Benjamin and Marshall McLuhan, actor-network theory helped in
    the development of theories like remediation, which took up the
    nonhuman implications of new media technolo- gies, as well as media
    logics like immediacy, hypermediacy, and Lev Manovich’s database
    aesthetic. Digital media function as material objects within the
    world, following Latour’s distinction between intermediaries and
    mediators, in which mediators are not neutral means of transmission
    but are actively involved in transforming whatever they mediate.
    Digital media operate through what Latour characterizes as
    translation, not by neutrally reproducing mean- ing or information
    but by actively transforming human and non- human actants, as well
    as their conceptual and affective states. By the end of the
    twentieth century, science studies and new media theory each offered
    different but largely compatible ways to incor- porate a concern for
    nonhumans into the humanities, to account for the agency of nonhuman
    actors, events, and mediation. "[23] <#eID23>

    "The nonhuman turn, on the other hand, insists (to paraphrase
    Latour) that “we have never been human” but that the human has
    always coevolved, coexisted, or collaborated with the nonhuman—and
    that the human is characterized precisely by this indistinction from
    the nonhuman.... Simondon’s argument for the coevolution of humans
    and technology has been restated from a different perspective by
    philosopher and cognitive scientist Andy Clark, who characterizes
    humans as “natural-born cyborgs” in order to underscore how (at
    least since the invention of language) human cognition has been
    interdependent with embodied, non-human technologies. "[23] <#eID23>

    "Technical mediation itself needs to be understood as a nonhuman
    process within which or through which humans and nonhumans relate.
    "[23] <#eID23>

    "Haraway of- fered the ironic figure of the cyborg, a hybrid of
    human and non- human, as a potential replacement for the
    human-centered figures of “woman” and “labor” that underlay the
    political critiques that late twentieth-century socialist-feminism
    often directed at infor- matics and technoscience. Haraway’s
    controversial conclusion that she would “rather be a cyborg than a
    goddess” was meant to counter a conception of woman that excluded
    the nonhuman from its pur- view. "[23] <#eID23>

    "And for Latour, the distribution of agency across a hetero- geneous
    network of human and nonhuman actants exploded the fundamental
    distinction between human science and nonhuman nature that
    underwrote much of the social science, history, and philosophy of
    science for much of the twentieth century. Science in Action was a
    crucial text in spurring actor-network theory to think intensively
    about the distribution of agency among human and nonhuman actors.
    "[23] <#eID23>

The role of agency within new media not related to the novelty or the
intricacies of the interactive system. It is directly affected by the
aesthetic choices of the artist.

    "But the instroduction into art of such formal elements as moving a
    trackball or clicking a mouse to recombine images and texts, moving
    the body to negotiate a VR environment, and/or posing questions for
    which there is no substatntive feedback, enhances neither agency nor
    meaningfulness. Although works employing these limited ranges of
    physical and mental activities are routinely described as
    'interactive', if the works have meaning at all, it resides
    primarily in artists' decisions,s rather than in participants'
    agency to shuffle or activate images, sounds, texts, and pattern
    sequences, and so on. The physical interaction by which viewers can
    trigger different effects may be pleasing and even surprising, such
    as playing with a kaleidoscope, but the visual and conceptual stakes
    of the work still finally reside in the artist's aesthetic choices.
    Such art, then, may be astonishingly conventional regardless of its
    technological novelty... "[62] <#eID62>

Agency is a force of a type of change that, should it attain a certain
level of significance, it provides meaning to the work, acquiring
aesthetic impact.

    "But as Doublas Browning pointed out nearly forty years ago, the
    philosophical goal of agency is to function as a locus of morality
    and individuality: 'the concept of the agent is required in order to
    allow for the possibility of freedom, communicaion, comprehension,
    and mystery. Culture in general ... rests upon... agency'.. Agency
    also has been tied to the execution of volution: 'a person is the
    agent of an event if and only if there is a description of what s/he
    did that makes true a sentence that says s/he did it intentionally'
    (Davidson 1971:46). Agency involves the freedom to create, change,
    and influence institutions and events, or to act as a proxy on
    behalf of someone else. In both cases, agency is measured by the
    ability and the respoinsability to have a meaningful effeecct in a
    real-world, inter-subjective, social context. "[62] <#eID62>

A defining aspect of agency in interactive arts is intentionality, which
has been considered central to meaning.

    "Agency repeatedly has been identified as a primary goal of
    multimedia technology. Interactive technologies and agency have
    become so closely connected that meaning in multimedia signifies as
    agency, in so far as meaning derives from the qualities that agency
    obtains in interaction.MEaning is purposive, entailing intention,
    aim, and objective result. While meaning is inherernt in the
    semiotics of the interactive exchange among artist, artwork, and
    audience, in order to be meaningful, agency and interaction must
    activate semiotic signification that is literally full of meaning.
    Interactive multimedia art, therefore, can be meaningful when it
    enhances the fullness of agency, otherwise meaning is missing in
    interaction, and meaningfulness is missing in agency. "[62] <#eID62>

    "The notion of network, in its barest topological outline, allows us
    already to reshuffle spatial metaphors that have rendered the study
    of society-nature so difficult: close and far, up and down, local
    and global, inside and outside. They are replaced by associations
    and connections "[33] <#eID33>

    " An actor-network is an entity that does the tracing and the
    inscribing. It is an ontological definition and not a piece of inert
    matter in the hands of others, especially of human planners or
    designers. ... An “actor” in AT is a semiotic definition -an
    actant-, that is, something that acts or to which activity is
    granted by others. It implies no special motivation of human
    individual actors, nor of humans in general. An actant can literally
    be anything provided it is granted to be the source of an action.
    ...There is no model of (human) actor in AT nor any basic list of
    competences that have to be set at the beginning because the human,
    the self and the social actor of traditionnal social theory is not
    on its agenda. "[33] <#eID33>

    "The attribution of human, unhuman, nonhuman, inhuman,
    characteristics; the distribution of properties among these
    entities; the connections established between them; the circulation
    entailed by these attributions, distributions and connections; the
    transformation of those attributions, distributions and connections,
    of the many elements that circulates and of the few ways through
    which they are sent. "[33] <#eID33>

Foucault's 'discursive formations'

    "The second and most encompassing aim of my project has been to
    address a new kind of anthropological object. ... The aim to expand
    the framework of anthropology to include the critical analysis of
    dominant elements of western culture and of modernity... to turn
    [antrhopologie's] techniques of analysis and criticism toward new
    objects: forms of power, forms of society and culture that have not
    yet been analyzed. ... such a reorientation will provide the tools
    for a truly reflexive anthropology, one that can analyze the
    interrelations between dominant forms of knowledge and their
    institutional and sociohistorical contexts–wether reflxively, with
    regard to anthropology, or more generally, after Foucault, in
    developing and increasingly astute social theory of culture,
    knowledge, and power.... I sketch a theoretical basis from which to
    engage in critique of cultural forms as at once social, theoretical,
    technological, and aesthetic: as complex totalities operating at all
    of these levels, all of which must be addressed if we are to attempt
    to develop new possibilities both for contemporary music and for
    cultural production in general. ... [note 5] I use the term
    /discourse/ in this book in two related, more and less inclusive
    senses as it was developed in the work of Foucault (1972,1977,1980)
    (See also Laclau 1980 and Cousins and Hussain 1984,77-97) The
    restricted sense refers to a system of meaning produced in
    linguistic practices. The inclusive sense refers to Foucault's
    theory of "discursive formations" in which, by historical analysis,
    he traces the close interrelations between power and dominant
    systems of knoledge as they are embodied in, or produced by,
    specific practices, institutions, and technologies. In this wider
    sense discourse thus includes the practices, technologies, and
    institutions enjoined by a particular form of knowledge –its
    material and social embodiment. "[10] <#eID10>

    "Another [less prominent theme] is the relation between aesthetics
    and technology. In theorizing this, I reject what I will call
    instrumentalist and evolutionist perspectives. Both of these
    conceive of technologies as independent of, or preceding, their
    cultural and aesthetic uses. Technologies are thus "found objects"
    brought into a particular aesthetic practive, and they are seen as
    instrumental in, and central to, generating aesthetic innovation. In
    the more extended evolutionist view, technological evolution is
    conceived as an independent variable driving music-historical change
    [Cutler 1984 (marx), Shepherd 1977 (mcluchan)] Both perspectives
    fail to examine the actual uses of the technologies, which are often
    depicted in idealized, unproblematic, and normative ways. By
    contrast, I examine critically here a culture that itself holds to
    the evolutionist perspective, and taht is itself involved in the
    development of high music technologies. I argue that in this culture
    not only the recourse to technology, but also the injunction to
    research and produce new technolgnologies as a means of promoting
    musical innovation, are overdetermined by an aesthetic and
    philosohpical discourse, that of modernism. This is to question the
    'autonomous' motor of technological development at least in relation
    to this particular discourse....In particular, I offer insight into
    the materiality and the research culture of advanced computer
    software, a medium that is overdue for emptirically-grounded
    sociocultural analysos (see Poster 1990, 149). "[10] <#eID10>

"Interrogating the multitextuality of musical culture"

    "There is at present no concerted theoretical basis for the study of
    music as a sociocultural form... In outlining a new approach it is
    useful, for my purposes, to start with what might be called the
    critical semiotics of music. ... Laing [1985] expands the semiotics
    of music in three ways: by extending the semiotic frame to the
    practices, social and institutional formas, and political economy of
    punk; by relating its internal signification to wider historical
    forces; and by analyzing the place of intertextual bricolage in the
    process of signification. In doing so his approach invokes two
    semiotic concepts: multitextuality –the analysis of meaning as
    operating through many simultaneous, juxtaposed, and interrelating
    symbolic forms or mediatiosn; and intertextuality – the idea that
    meaning is created by signs referencing other cultural realms
    through connotation. Laing moves therefore from a formal to a social
    semiotics... Feld derives from his work a general comparative
    framework for the sociocultural analysis of music (1984a), which is
    useful in emphasizing, like Laing, different levels of mediation –
    material environment, theories, practices, performance rituals – as
    well as paying attention to power and mystification around music....
    these writers explore the various social, cultural, and
    technological forms that together constitute the complex whole
    through which music is experienced and has meaning. There are two
    implications,,, First, their work presages a social semiotics of
    music, one that stresses the multitextuality of music as culture and
    the need to analyze its various mediations – aural, visual-textual,
    technological, social – both in themselves and as an ensemble.
    Second, they imply that it is only by critically analyzing each
    level of mediation in this way that it is possible to identify the
    specific forms of ideology, stratification, and power that inhere in
    each musical culture. "[10] <#eID10>

    "“Bio molecular, cellular, gene and genome studies have become major
    research areas that have already influenced our lives and have the
    potential to completely change our perception of ourselves and how
    we function in society.” "[68] <#eID68>

    "A computer program analyzes aspects of a human improvisor’s
    performance in real time, using that analysis to guide an automatic
    composition (or, if you will, improvisation) program that generates
    both complex responses to the musician’s playing and independent
    behavior that arises from its own internal processes.... "[34] <#eID34>

    "... the Western world is imploding. During the mechanical ages we
    had extended our bodies in space. Today, after more than a century
    of electric technology, we have extended our central nervous system
    itself in a global embrace, abolishing both space and time as far as
    our planet is concerned. Rapidly, we approach the final phase of the
    extensions of man--the technological simulation of consciousness,
    when the creative process of knowing will be collectively and
    corporately extended to the whole of human society, much as we have
    already extended our senses and our nerves by the various media.
    "[44] <#eID44>

    "After three thousand years of specialist explosion and of
    increasing specialism and alienation in he technological extensions
    of our bodies, our world has become compressional by dramatic
    reversal. As electrically cointracted, the globe is no more than a
    village... It is this implosive factor that alters the position of
    the Negro, the teen-ager, and some other groups. They can no longer
    be contained, in the political sense of limited association. They
    are now involved in our lives, as we in theirs, thanks to the
    electric media. "[44] <#eID44>

    "Before the electric speed and total field, it was not obvious that
    the medium is the message. The message, it seemed, was the
    'content', as people used to ask what a painting was about. Yet they
    never thought to ask what a melody was about, nor what a house or a
    dress was about. "[44] <#eID44>

    "The poet or novelist now composes on the typewriter. The typewriter
    fuses omposition and publication, causing an entirely new attitude
    to the written and printed word. Composing on the typewriter has
    altered the forms of the language and of literature in ways best
    seen in the latter novels of Henry James that were dictated to Miss
    Theodora Bosanquet, who took them down, not by shorthand, but on a
    typewriter. Her memoir, /Henry James at Work/, should have been
    followed by other studies of how the typewriter has altered English
    verse and prose, and, indeed, the very mental habits, themselves, of
    writers. With Henry James, the typewriter had become a confirmed
    habit by 1907, and his new style developed a sort of free,
    incantatory quality. His secretary tells of how he found dictating
    not only easier but more inspiring than composing by hand: 'it all
    seems to be so much more effectively and unceasingly /pulled/ out of
    me in speech than in writing,' he told her. Indeed, he became so
    attached to the sound of his typewriter that, on his deathbed, Henry
    James called for his Remington to be worked near his bedside. "[44]
    <#eID44>

    "Perhaps it is not very contradictory that when a medium becomes a
    means of depth expeience the old categories of 'classical' and
    'popular' or of 'highbrow' and 'lowbrow' no longer obtain. ... When
    l.p. and hi-fi and stereo arrived, a depth approach to musical
    experience also came in. Everybody lost his inhibitions about
    'highbrow,' and the serious people lost their qualms aobut popular
    music and culture... 'depth' means 'in interrelation,' not 'in
    isolation.' Depth means insight, not point of view; and insight is a
    kind of mental involvement in process that makes the content of the
    item seem quite secondary. Consciousness itself is an inclusive
    process not at atll dependent on content. Consciousness does not
    postulate consciousness of anything in particular. "[44] <#eID44>

    "Automation is information and it not only ends jobs in the world of
    work, it ends subjects in the world of learning. It does not end the
    world of learning. The future of work consists of learning a living
    in the automation age. This is a familiar pattern in electric
    technology in general. It ends the old dichotomies between culture
    and technology, between art and commerce, and between work and
    leisure. Whereas in the mechanical age of fragmentation leisure had
    been the absence of work, or mere idleness, the reverse is true in
    the electric age. As the age of information demands the simultaneous
    use of all our faculties, we discover that we are most at leisure
    when we are most intensely involved, very much as with the artists
    in all ages. "[44] <#eID44>

    "The computer offers a model that has the characteristics shared by
    all automation. From the point of intake of materials to the output
    of the finished product, the operations tend to be independently, as
    well as interdependently, automatic. The synchronized concert of
    operations is under the control of gauges and instruments that can
    be varied from the control-panel boards that are themselves
    electronic. The material of intake is relatively uniform in shape,
    size, and chemical properties, as likewise the material of the
    output. But the processing under these conditions permit use of the
    highest level of capacity for any needed period. It is, as compared
    with older machines, the difference between an oboe in an orchestra
    and the same tone on an electronic music instrument. With the
    electronic music instrument, any tone can be made available in any
    intensity and for any length of time. Note that the older symphony
    orchestra was, by comparison, a machine of separate instruments that
    /gave the effect of organic unity/. With the electronic instrument,
    one /starts/ with organic unity as an immediate fact of perfect
    synchronization. This makes the attempt to create the effect of
    organic unity quite pointless. Electronic music must seek other
    goals. "[44] <#eID44>


        Authorship

The concept of 'context provision' practiced and studied by digital
artists is grounded in Benjamin's concept of the artist as producer of
an 'apparatus' that provides a context for self-representation for others.

    "Foster's assumtion is that the artist-as-ethnographer will engage
    in observation to produce a representation and that any
    representation so produced will become a projection of the artist's
    own perspective and assumptions. Certainly this is a likely outcome
    of many authorial approaches. However, Benjamin does not propose a
    new approach to representation but the construction of a new
    apparatus that provides a context for self-representation. He
    asserts that the author should operate as a context provider,
    avoiding representation, not speaking for others, but providing them
    with the means to speak for themselves. "[14] <#eID14>

Storytelling is a key aspect of the construction of self and therefore
as a structural principle in the relationship between author and audience.

    "In her essay 'storytelling as a nexus of change in the relationship
    between gender and technology: a feminist approach to software
    design', Justine Cassell (1998) suggests that the principals of
    feminist research practice offer a solution to the problem of power
    in the complex relations between author/authority and audience. In
    feminist software design authority is distributed to collaborating
    participants by allowing most of the design and construction to be
    carried out by the participants rather than the designer. The role
    of the author, and in some cases the role of the system designer, is
    given to the participant. .... The feminist software designer's goal
    is to give the 'user' a tool to express something about the truth of
    her existence -- to tell her story. Anecdotes and stories are
    distinct from narrative in that they describe, rather than
    prescribe, real-lived experience. Storytelling facilitates the
    construction of self and the exploration of social roles. "[14] <#eID14>

The fact that cellular automata systems function both as an individual
and as a community of subjects exemplifies a “collapse of the binary
opposition of autonomy and community”, a contingency which displaces the
enlightenment model of individual “I”.

    "One example from systems theory that provides an interesting model
    for thinking about the relation of subject to system is the cellular
    automata. Cellular automata are self-evolving or emergent systems
    that extend in space and unfold in time according to local laws. The
    automata is a field or frame, usually visualized as a two- or
    therr-dimensional grid of cells or pixels. Each cell or pixel may
    'behave' independently at each 'step' in time based on a table of
    rules and a given initial condition. The table of rules is a set of
    definitions for the behavior of each pixel or cell in relation to
    the state of each neighboring pixel or cell. A global state emerges
    from the local interactions of discrete entities in an iterative and
    evolving system. In emergent systems such as cellular automata,
    subjectivity is socialized. The system itself functions both as an
    individual subject and a 'community' of subjects. Cellular automata
    exemplify a collapse of the binary opposition of autonomy and
    community and embody an oscillating, productive tension between the
    individual and the social, which suggests the potential of a new
    subject position, one I will call the 'system_subject'. From the
    system_subject, the cybernetic collapse is mobile, it may be
    reversed, inverted, repeated, and revised. The enlightenment model
    of the individual 'I' is displaced by a contingency that may
    function as a single entity or a distributed network of entities
    within a system narrative. "[14] <#eID14>

As a context provider, the artist engages in a process of decentering
“making multiple spaces”, in which the telling of truths in the plural
is the principal goal. Context provision facilitates the critical and
utopian imaginaries that open our eyes towards the “contextual realities
of social oppression and othering – the terrible closure of the system
in which we are trapped.”

    "In this passage from 'the author as producer', ... Benjamin
    precisely described my artistic vision and my position as
    practicioner: 'What matters, therefore, is the exemplary character
    of production, which is able first to induce other producers to
    produce, and second to put an improved apparatus at their disposal.
    And this apparatus is better the more consumers it is able to turn
    into producer --that is, readers or spectators into collaborators
    ... ' (Benjamin 1978). I see myself as a context provider,
    stretching hte concept of artitistic creation from making content to
    making context. My goal is to avoid representation --not to speak
    for other but to provide them with the means to speak for
    themselves, to speak and be heard. Context provision is about
    decentering --making multtiple spsaces-- not telling a truth but
    truths in the plural. It is about facilitating the kind of critical,
    utopian imaginaries that force us to see the contextual realities of
    social oppression and othering --the terrible closure of the system
    in which we are trapped. Context provision is Benjamin's
    'apparatus'. "[14] <#eID14>

For Lovejoy, authorship and meaning in art is challenged, and the
relationship between theory and practice is subject to new questions.

    "A congruence of factors emerged in the last century that created
    conditions that broke down traditional concepts of art as object and
    forced the evolution of dynamic forms with new functions. These
    factors challenge authorship as well as relations between artist and
    audience in the construction of meaning, and they rise new questions
    about the relationship between theory and practice. "[35] <#eID35>

In allowing agency to the participant and in making self-generating
forms, there is a loss of full authorship control. The task of the
artist is still, however, that of "harnessing the creative process"

    "Although harnessing the creative process is stil the artist's
    essential task, the loss of full authorship control in creating a
    digital work has become a reality for those artist who seek to
    create self-generating forms that llow for significant levels of
    participation and agency. "[35] <#eID35>

Bakhtin conceptualized the meaning and structure of dialogue as
collaborative force: individual expression is the consequence of dynamic
and difficult inner struggles, social knowledge and cooperative,
dialogic exchange.

    "[Bakhtin] is one of the first to focus and explore the meaning and
    structure fo dialogue as a collaborative rather than individual
    force. He believed that our individual acts of expression --wether
    visual, written, or oral-- are the result of dynamic, difficult
    inner struggle, which may sift through one's social knowledge to
    experiences with others' dialogic interconnection of cooperative
    exchange. "[35] <#eID35>

The dialogic aspect of digital media consists of the art work becoming a
collaborative system, which acts as a force for the creation of new
aesthetic territories. This has been grounded in Bakhtin's 'dialogic
imagination'. The artist is therefore one who 'frames' or provides an
'ethnographic' structure that depends on participation by others.

    "Because digital media are often literally dialogic... the position
    of 'making' and the relations between artist and audience are
    altered. Their roles and identities are changed. .. the interface
    meeting point between artowkr and viewer becomes an interplay
    between form and dialogue... Such collaborative systems, with their
    inherent contradictions, are a force for foging new unpredictability
    in aesthetic territory in a process Bakhtin termed 'the dialogic
    imagination'. In this process the role of the artist/author changes
    from one who has total control of the artwork to one who designs a
    'framing' or 'ethonographic' structure that invites a wide public to
    collaborate. Without audience participation, the work is incomplete.
    "[35] <#eID35>

Barthes refuses fixed meaning or originality in authors. He claims that
the work exists in a "multidimensional space" in which the decentered
cultural network is activated, in terms of blending, clashing of its
works (or nodes)

    "In “Death of the Author,”8 Barthes asserted that the author (or
    artist) is never the source and the site of meaning but rather that
    meaning is never invented, nor is it locked in. A work exists in a
    “multidimensional space in which a variety of works, none of them
    original, blend and clash. The work is a tissue of quotations drawn
    from the innumerable centers of culture . . . .;” The artist or
    author is no longer the only container for feelings, impressions,
    passions, but is rather “this immense dictionary from which he draws
    a writing (image) that can know no halt: life never does more than
    imitate the book, and the book itself is only a tissue of signs, an
    imitation that is lost, infinitely deferred.” This position of
    refusal to find fixed meanings or originality in authors, artists or
    their work is a fundamental refusal of what he regarded as an
    ossified and essentially backward-looking humanism. "[36] <#eID36>

Eurocentric, centered and authoritatice thought is now outdated in the
face of globalized transnational, information economy. For Lovejoy, new
media is central to the shift in perception and attitudes towards the
structure of art and its production and dissemination. This paradigmatic
change was possible via strategies of deconstruction that "opened the
way to alternative representations involving social and cultural
contexts for ideas"

    "Deconstructive strategies opened the way to alternative
    representations involving social and cultural contexts for ideas.
    Eurocentric thought assumed a centered, authoritative voice based on
    a single worldview, structured through domination and transformation
    of subjected cultures. This attitude now seems outdated in the face
    of a globalized transnational, information economy. Even the process
    of analysis itself is suspect. In the wake of cultural
    deconstruction and the shifting consciousness of the times,
    resistance to technology as an integral aspect of art-making and
    cultural development began to erode. Not only had new media invaded
    and changed the very fabric of public life by the mid-1970s (see
    Chapters 4 and 5), but they also began to play an integral part in
    altering perceptions and attitudes about the structure of art and
    its production and dissemination. The wider dispersal and
    dissemination of artistic practices could no longer be contained
    within the old framework. “The shift from art that could only refer
    to itself, to an art that could refer to everything, took place
    almost overnight.”9 "[36] <#eID36>

Lovejoy claims that there is a dependency on mediated information. The
fact that life is suspended in between reality and its representation
allowed for the conceptualization of a decentered, multiplied self. This
confusion is originated by the erasure of the distinction between
fantasy and reality given by exposure to high technologies that blur
spatial and temporal boundaries.

    "A confusion between spatial and temporal boundaries has occurred
    through exposure to high technology, collapsing it and sometimes
    erasing the conventions that formerly dis- tinguished fantasy from
    reality. Instead of relying on a sense of reality gained from direct
    experience and belief in a single authoritative system, we depend on
    a variety of mediated information. We alternate and are suspended
    between the reality of daily life and the representation or edited
    copy of it that we respond to via television. This shifting response
    has contributed to an assault on the concept of the self as the
    center of a single reality with a single viewpoint. "[36] <#eID36>

It is due to the advent of the computer what allowed readers, listeners,
viewers to enter the work with a position of power. This is a
celebration of the "inherent creative capacities of all individuals".
The work becomes a context, an "environmen for new experiences of
exchange and learning".

    "Interactive media have special qualities. They avoid the linear
    sequencing of a film or novel. They allow instead a less linear
    choice system structured into the work which is designed to function
    only through viewer action. The viewer will be able to understand
    the work’s meaning or its conceptual structure only by exploring the
    many layers and margins which form the context of the piece.
    Information about parallel related texts or images can be accessed
    in the data space of the work and brought onto the screen for review
    as part of its potential to unfold many archival levels . Up to now,
    art works have always been shaped by visual artists, poets, writers,
    composers, choreographers who assumed the total responsibility,
    opportunity, and challenge of creating their own discrete work
    without invasion of the work from outside participation. They had to
    decide on content, format, style, sequence, materials, medium.
    However, with interactivity, readers, viewers, listeners can pass
    through the boundaries of the work to enter it. This puts them in a
    position to gain direct access to an aspect of authoring and shaping
    the final outcome of a work in a way that never existed before the
    advent of the computer. The viewer can now have a significant
    position of power in the work. The artist gives up total control in
    favor of a new kind of viewer communication and experience, one
    which offers an active position for the viewer, one which also
    celebrates the inherent creative capacities of all individuals. The
    work becomes more of a frame or context which provides an
    environment for new experiences of exchange and learning.
    Interactivity offers important new avenues to cognition to take
    place, where works can begin to flow with the more psychological
    internal associations of the individual viewer’s consciousness and
    identity in mind. Interactive systems utilize processes of exchange,
    learning, and adaptation and foreground the premise that meaning in
    a work of art is dependent upon exchange and communication between
    individuals and groups. They provide a context for participants to
    reflect their personal understandings about their own social and
    political contexts. "[36] <#eID36>

For Benjamin, the distinction between author and public is disapearing,
since everyne can now become a writer due to the growth of reproduction
technologies.

    "In his essay “The Author as Producer,” Benjamin pointed out that,
    with the accessibility and growth of reproduction technologies,
    everyone can now become a writer, not only through letters to the
    editor in the daily press but also, now, through publishing
    opportunities made possible by advances in (electronic) technology.
    “For as literature gains in breadth what it loses in depth, so the
    distinction between author and public which the bourgeois press
    maintains by artificial means, is beginning to disappear.” The new
    electronic publish- ing technologies27 open communications
    possibilities to artists which were never before available. "[36]
    <#eID36>

In the artistic field there are two modes of traditional totalization:
intention and extension. The former represents the author, which is a
"synonym of the closure of the work's meaning", and the latter
represents the work itself, which, in this era of 'digital
hyper-reproducibility' loses its materiality.

    "The sound art work now moves to an era of digital
    hyper-reproducibility There is no longer an original since
    everything takes place through sampling and duplication. “This
    scrambling, in the division of roles between production and
    consumption, creation and reception, at the same time renders
    fragile two modes of traditional totalization in the artistic field:
    in intention, the author, synonym of the closure of the work’s
    meaning; in extension, the work itself, which loses its physical and
    temporal limits – fantasy rendered to the flux of a universal sound
    material.”23 "[36] <#eID36>

    "Two logical infirmities are apparent which deny them the right to
    speak of chance on the one hand and "composition" on the other... 1.
    The interpreter is a highly conditioned being, so that it is not
    possible to accept the thesis of unconditioned choice, of an
    interpreter acting like a roulette game... 2. The composer commits
    an act of resignation when he admits several possible and equivalent
    circuits. In the name of a "scheme" the problem of choice is
    betrayed, and it is the interpreter who is promoted to the rank of
    composer by the composer himself. There is thus a substitution of
    authors... "[73] <#eID73>

The figure and function of the author is reconceptualized with the
emergence of the "hypertext"

    "hypertext --which I am here taking as the convergence of
    poststructuralist conceptions of textuality and electronic
    embodiments of it --does do away with ceratin aspects of the
    authoritativeness and autonomy of the text, and in so doing it does
    reconceive the figure and function of authorship. "[32] <#eID32>

Hypertext is the materialization of the posmodern, decentered self.

    ""this 'I' which approaches the text is already itself a plurality
    of other texts, of codes which are infinite"(S/Z,10). Barthes's
    point ... appears much clearer and more obviou s from the vantage
    point of intertextuality. ... Hypertext embodies many of the ideas
    and attitueds proposed by Barthes, Derrida, Foucault and others.
    ;... For all these authors, the self takes the form of a decentered
    ... networks of codes that, on another level, also serves as a node
    within another centerless network "[32] <#eID32>

The agency of the socio-economic situation of the artist has been
question in relation to the aesthetic choices that are carried out as
artistic practice. In this sense, the authorial agency of art is
reconstructed in terms of social influences

    "Central among the questions raised by the crisis of musical
    modernisms is to what extent composers are aware of the relation
    between their aesthetic and the likely fate of their music in terms
    of public reception and economic subsidy. Or does this relation, and
    the way that it might feed back into composers' aesthetic choices,
    remain largely an involuntary and/or unconscious one? This touches
    on the heart of romantic conceptions of the artist, in which the
    artist is simply an involuntary vessel through which inspiration
    flows. The aesthetic is seen here as an essential extension of the
    self, almost beyond conscious reach, and integrity is gauged by the
    artist's determined commitment to this aesthetic. In questioning
    this view, a different conception of the artist as subject and of
    the artistic oeuvre may be required (Foucault 1984c)...
    Poststructuralist critiques of authorship are therefore metonymic of
    the wider questioning of classic humanist notions of a unified,
    sovereign, and rational subject. I employ psychoanalytic theory to
    sketch an alternative conception of the composer-subject. "[10] <#eID10>

The structure of authorship has been examined as a construct between the
dynamics of the artist (as individual and as institution) and the
violent internalization of this dynamic in the composer-subject.

    "While for some decades it has been an article of postrsructuralist
    faith to interrogate the 'author' as construct, this has not been
    supported by much empirical or historical research. Here I examine
    the construction of authorship at many levels: not only the
    strategies by which individuals become invested with the
    extraordinary charisma of the creative artist, the motivations,
    contestations and contradictions of the process, and how the
    discourse of authorship is used in strategies of individual and
    institutional legitimation, but also the ways in which the process
    is subjectively internalized, the ambivalence to which this gives
    rise, and the internal violence that may be involved in overcoming
    this ambivalence. "[10] <#eID10>

Authorship is also at an intersection between computer technologies,
collaborative work, and it is subject to questions of intellectual property.

    "I examine authorship in relation not only to musical composition at
    IRCAM but also to computer technologies, and insights are generated
    into each. At one level these concern the different kinds of
    collaborative labor and the social relations of each area of
    cultural production, illuminating issues such s the pleasures and
    tensions of collaborative cultural production and related questions
    of intellectual property "[10] <#eID10>

    "Umberto Eco describes the open work: “A work of art is a complete
    and closed form in its uniqueness as a balanced organic whole, while
    at the same time constituting an open product on account of its
    susceptibility to count- less different interpretations which do not
    impinge on unadulterable spe- cificity. Hence every reception of a
    work of art is an interpretation and a performance of it, "[60] <#eID60>

    "“Will information be available and free in the public domain, or
    will it be patented and owned by the large corporate sector?” "[68]
    <#eID68>

    "Foucault’s “author function” is a system
    ofclassificationwherethenameoftheauthor(asopposedto“signer,”“guar-
    antor,” or “writer”) identifies, elevates, and frames a text.The
    author function has to do with ownership and transgression. The
    author functions as the founder of a discourse, the owner of the
    property of a text, and, as such, an individual subject, both
    privileged and psychologized, whose biography gives meaning to and
    takes meaning from the text. "[15] <#eID15>

    "Roland Barthes, “The author is a modern figure . . . the epitome
    and the culmination of capitalist ideology.”7 The indi-
    vidualization of the author provided a context for the
    objectification of the work as both unity and commodity. "[15] <#eID15>

    "The premodernist narrator was a mediator rather than author—a
    shaman whose role was performative rather than creative. The
    narrator’s story was an aggregate, its origin collective. The
    shaman/narrator performed for the community narratives belonging to
    the community. ...There is no fixed relation, no unity, no single
    author—only stories that continuously unfold to reveal increasingly
    com- plex topologies. These fluid configurations, the fleeting
    figures and patterns they reveal, are the concern of ethics and
    aesthetics in the context of the materiality of informatics...
    Authorial individuality and author- ity is already “de-centered” by
    the fragmentation of the social world, by the relativity and
    relationality of the worldviews of any of its actors. "[15] <#eID15>

    "Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle is taken to mean that on an
    elementary level, the physical universe does not exist in a
    deterministic form, but rather as a collection of probabilities, or
    potentials. ... the act of observing makes the observer part of the
    system under study.[...] Uncertainty is thus implicated in the
    disappearance of the author/observer. "[15] <#eID15>

    "incorporate the observer as part of the system ... self-reflexive,
    self-organizing, self-making ... envelops the observer/subject
    within its field .. sys- tem and subject, perception and
    representation, are collapsed, elided—there is no exterior ...
    Bakhtin’s dialogic, polyphonic, multivocal model for narrative, ...
    a whole formed by the interaction of many entities or con-
    sciousnesses none of which entirely becomes an object for the other,
    ... avoidance of objectification—non-participating third parties are
    not represented in any way—only participating voices speak within
    and through their own intersubjective experience "[15] <#eID15>

    "Where subject and system collapse in autopoetic epistemology
    (causing perception and representation, which are dependent upon the
    organizing principle of the system, to be played out in
    self-reflexive reiteration) in emer- gent systems like cellular
    automata, subjectivity is socialized and the system functions as a
    “community.” ... In cellular automata, the contra- diction between
    individual autonomy and community collapses. Cellular automata
    embody an oscillating, productive tension between the individual and
    the social—there is no observer, only interdependent agents or
    actors. ... The problem of the role of the observer in physics and
    cybernetics is par- allel to the problem of authorship and
    representation in art. ... Foucault quote: "depriving the subject
    (or its substitute) of its role as originator, and of analyzing the
    subject as a variable and complex function of a [system or]
    discourse" "[15] <#eID15>

    "“collaborative systems” to describe public art pro- duced in
    collaboration with local and online communities and structured on
    the model of the spatially and temporally distributed dynamics of
    cel- lular automata. ... For Mikhail Bahktin, meaning is derived
    from dialogue, which is grounded in a social context.” “voices of
    those excluded from “history”—voices “that reveal the details of
    everyday life—in order to decode the social world.”27 Bahktin’s
    theory of dialogism assumes that no individ- ual ever writes, or
    authors, alone.[...] To write and construct new knowledge and
    meaning, the subject must be a variable—we must engage in a dialogic
    process where “the words and images of one individual are examined
    and primarily understood in rela- tionship to the words and images
    of others.”29 This interaction requires an infrastructure like that
    of a database. "[15] <#eID15>

    "Notions of value are derived from the social world of the
    participating community and focused on transformative process, not
    product. I would like to appropriate this notion of social aes-
    thetics, first articulated by William Olander and Craig Owens in the
    cata- logue for the exhibition “Art and Social Change, U.S.A.” in
    1986, and expand it to address public art that critically engages
    the “materiality of informatics” by employing information and
    communication technologies.53... Hayles’s “Informatics” is an
    infrastructure that is of, by, and for the techno- logically
    enfranchised socioeconomic/political elite, but no one in reach of
    globalized capitalism, however far outside the infrastructure, is
    exempt. ... To “do cultural democracy” now, in the context of the
    materiality of infor- matics, means:” “• Distributing control over
    the processes of the database—the accumulation and interpretation of
    information, the naming and classification of data, for the
    collective construction of a new social semiotics. • Building and/or
    annexing social and technological infrastructures that can enable
    communities to become the co-designers and creators of programs and
    systems that facilitate their own reclamation, reintegration, and
    sustainability. ... Scheherazade was not an author—she spoke in
    order to sustain her life and save the lives of others. Her
    storytelling was a political act. The Thousand and One Nights has no
    single author, only “compilers” of editions and versions—it is a
    database, a frame tale, stories within a story. [...] Her
    storytelling produces a nonauthorial, collective subject whose
    life/lives are saved through this process of subjectification. "[15]
    <#eID15>

    "This new paradigm is defined by the participant-subject (who is
    subjectified through individual and collective storytelling) and the
    context- provider (who establishes a framework in which the
    “participant-subject” may emerge and make a “statement” or
    “articulation” in concert with other participant-subjects—thus
    producing collective statements out of individual, nonauthorial
    voices). "[15] <#eID15>

The concept of the "open work" or "work in progress" have been
constructed in relation to autonomy of the performer. This autonomy is
also considered "improvised creation”, that is, the extent to which the
performer imposes judgement on the form of the work.

    "A number of recent pieces of instrumental music are linked by a
    common feature: the considerable autonomy left to the individual
    performer in the way he chooses to play the work. Thus he is not
    merely free to interpret the composer's instructions following his
    own discretion (which in fact happens in traditional music), but he
    must impose his judgement on the form of the piece, as when he
    decides howw long to hold a note or in what order to group the
    sounds: all this amounts to an act of improvised creation. Here are
    some of the best known examples of the process. Klavierstuck XI, by
    Karlheinz Stockhausen... Luciano Berio's Sequenza for solo flute ...
    Henri Pousseur['s] Scambi ... Pierre Boulez's Third Sonata for piano
    ... "[19] <#eID19>

    "...my model in this regard is the Javanese gamelan ensemble, where
    a large number of players playing a relatively fixed composition
    nonetheless have considerable latitude in interpretation, even at
    primary levels such as pitch, duration and rhythm. Control of
    musical process is shared among players; inter-player com-
    munication takes place without necessarily involving a central
    authority. Local decisions taken by individual players percolate up
    to the global level, at which the overall form is maintained. "[34]
    <#eID34>

    " Born’s explicit identification of the nearly all- male, all-white
    musical and cultural canon articulated not only by the French
    institute, but by its American equivalents, traces the outlines of
    the development of a post-1950s aesthetic of trans-European
    experimentalism. Given her so far unrefuted thesis that the
    overwhelming majority of computer music research and compositional
    activity locates itself (how- ever unsteadily at times) within the
    belief systems and cul- tural practices of European concert music,
    one can easily imagine a work that, like Voyager, exemplifies an
    area of musical discourse using computers that is not viewed
    culturally and historically as a branch of trans-European
    contemporary concert music and, moreover, is not necessarily modeled
    as a narrative about “composition.” "[34] <#eID34>


        Changes in Technology, Social, Global Context

Sacks claims that the central artistic and aesthetic focus on the body
is contrasted with what Katherine Hayles's has shown about the
scientific research and developement of dematerialization and
disembodiment of information. Sacks expands this contradicion as the
aesthetics of information into Bruno Latour's concept of the Body Politic.

    "Paul's diagnosis is acutely accurate and yet troubling in these
    contemporary, cultural circmstances in which a loss of the body is
    oftentimes promoted as a benefit of information technologies. The
    central artistic, aesthetic focus on the body is in sharp contrast
    with the scientific and engineering pragmatics that dematerialized
    the body ofer the course of the invention and development of
    contemporary information technologies. In a history of cybernetics
    and information technologies, literary theorist Katherine Hayles
    shows how the dematerialization and disembodiment of information was
    seena s a good thing and explicitly pursued as a line of scientific
    research and development (Hayles 1999).... the aesthetics of
    information visualization concerns the Body Politic, and the history
    of information visualization is the history of art and design
    created to gather together, reflect, and represent the Body Politic.
    Its history includes the history of public spaces, the arts, and
    literatures representative or suportive of the Body Politic. (bruno
    latour 1997) "[58] <#eID58>

Lovejoy expresse that the current state of art, in its immaterial state
and with its collaborative nature is challenging institutional approaches.

    "The hybrid and collaborative nature of art using digital
    technologies as a medium also questions established practices of
    institutions suchas museums, funding organizations, and the art
    world at large. Artists and curators face the difficulties of
    presenting art forms that often have no preconfigured physical
    components or have no established connections between the physical
    and the virtual realm "[35] <#eID35>

There is a new consciousness that challenges art as object since the
artwork is becoming immaterial, interactive, and it can be experienced
simultaneously by a mass audience in different locations.

    "In the context of the cultural developments that have emerged as a
    rsult of these major changes in technological standards, a new
    conciousness has evolved in which art as an object for inficidual
    viewing became more and more challenge. Not only had the artwork
    become immaterial and interactive, but it could be seen or
    experienced simultaneously by mass audiences in different locations.
    "[35] <#eID35>

For Lovejoy, the use of digital technologies has restructured visual
perception completely, "opening to new territory of completely
simulated, or virtual, reality with entirely different space relations."

    "With digital technologies we no longer have a spatial fixed-point
    perspective; with morphing, we no longer have fixed spatial or
    temporal relationships; reality can now be paralleled by a
    completely simulated (virtual) one. Digitization has destroyed the
    faith in the truthfulness in representation. Cultural conditions
    have dramatically changed. Technologically based art does not just
    change the kind of art that is made and our relationship to it, but
    it changes the nature of human perception. Technological
    instrumentation makes it possible to see things that could not have
    been seen before and to see them in a way in which they could never
    before have been seen. Just as photography and the cinema opened the
    world to an expanded conscious- ness of the close-up, the far
    distant view, and the psychological, through editing and out-of-
    context views, so has the use of digital technologies allowed for
    the complete restructuring of the visual, opening to new territory
    of completely simulated, or virtual, reality with entirely different
    space relations. In new forms of technological representation, such
    as database ones, the technological tool is integral to the form,
    content, context, and process of the art, not just a way of
    transmitting it. Interactive digital media are international,
    inviting participa- tion from individuals globally. Every desktop is
    now a printing press. Digitized images are set immediately into the
    electronic page setup for printing in millions of copies. Computer
    networks can act as broadcasting stations. We are only beginning to
    realize the implications for education and community relations,
    using powers at our fingertips. “The world has . . . become too
    small for an ivory tower mentality.”7 "[36] <#eID36>

Dietz quotes Alain Minc and Simon Nora's report to the president of
france in 1979 in which they argue that the development of the computer
has changed the world. They termed this the "computerization of society"

    "the contemporary scenes that Eno gee up in and out of, broadly
    speaking, was on the cusp of what French sociologists Alain Minc and
    Simon Nora referred to in 1978 as the "comp[uterization of society"
    --the rise and intersection of networks and computation, stating
    simple, "The applications of the computer have developed to such an
    extent that the economic and social organization of our societ and
    our way of life may well be transformed as a result" . This
    intersection has inarguably changed the world. (the computerization
    of society: a report to the president of france, cambridge, 1979)...
    "[16] <#eID16>

    "Through his music, his visual art and his ideas, Eno has surfed
    this computerization of society and surrendered himself to it. In
    doing so he has contributed enormously to defining it. Part of what
    he found -and practiced- is that the traditional notions of high art
    and fine art are not as useful as they once were. "the traditional
    sites for art activity seem to be losing their power, while new
    sites for art are becoming powerful." "[16] <#eID16>

    "this period in art we now call the contemporary has been coming
    together for a while, and it parallels other contemporary hegemonic
    formations such as globalisation and neoliberalism that come to be
    fully in place by the late 1980s. By summoning the concept of a
    hegemonic formation, I mean to signal that I do not think that the
    consolidation of the contemporary is just a question of
    periodisation [By 'hegemonic formation' I refer to what Chantal
    Mouffe describes as 'an ensemble of relatively stable social forms,
    the materialization of a social articulation in which different
    social relations react reciprocally either to provide each other
    with mutual conditions of existence, or at least to neutralize the
    potentially destructive effects of certain social relations on the
    reproduction of other such relations(1988)] "[4] <#eID4>

    "Thinking of the contemporary as a period—and, of course, the real
    power of any periodising concept is heuristic, enabling us to see
    the familiar in new and productive ways—allows us to draw
    connections between occurrences and events that are unfolding. The
    first is social and political (and to a large degree economic) and
    relates to what has, since the end of the Cold War, come to be
    referred to as ‘globalisation’. ...Globalisation thus stands as an
    attempt to name the present—it is a periodising concept, especially
    when it announces the end of internationalism or, even more
    ominously, the end of history. Globalisation takes a number of forms
    within the context of the art world. One is the thematic or
    iconographic representations of global integration in a diverse body
    of works. ... Another form that globalisation takes within the art
    world is the proliferation of large global exhibitions in temporary
    contexts (that is to say, biennials, triennials, Documentas, art
    fairs, and the like). ... ‘The global exhibitions’, Martha Rosler
    stated in a recent roundtable discussion, ‘serve as grand collectors
    and translators of subjectivities under the latest phase of
    globalization’.9 And yet, the structure of these global exhibitions
    follows the logic of the market: ‘the means of selection have been
    institutionalized . . . Artists are commonly put forward by other
    interested parties, such as powerful galleries and curators, whose
    investment is often linked to prospective sales. ... the neoliberal
    economy of globalisation has been accompanied by new collecting
    practices. Gone is the chic collector who seeks cultural capital,
    let alone the connoisseur of early modernism; art collecting today
    is largely dominated by purchases of sheer speculation. "[4] <#eID4>

    "Yet another form that globalisation takes in art is the explosive
    emergence of counter-globalisation artistic practices.... Second,
    the contemporary is witnessing the emergence of a new technological
    imaginary following the unexpected and unregulated global expansion
    of the new communication and information technologies of the
    Internet. What began as a Cold War project designed to provide a
    functioning communications network in the case of a nuclear attack
    has exploded since the early 1990s development of the global
    hypertext space, the World Wide Web. The full integration of
    electronic and digital culture that has developed in the
    contemporary period reverberates in a number of ways within the
    context of art and art history. For one thing, technological art
    objects have increasingly come to replace tangible ones in art
    galleries and museums, which have seen an upsurge of high-tech
    hybrids of all kinds, from digital photography, to film and video
    installations, to computer and other ‘new media’ art. The white cube
    has begun to be replaced by the black box, the small-screen film or
    video monitor by the large-scale wall projection. The image has come
    to replace the object as the central concern of artistic production
    and analysis. In the academy, the rise of visual studies in this
    period is symptomatic of this new pre-eminence of the image.14
    Furthermore, the imaginary nature of this shift from analogue to
    digital has had a number of unpredictable effects. "[4] <#eID4>

    "Such a quantitative growth of new media has led to a reinvention of
    our concepts and practices of communication, information, community,
    property, space, and even the concept of the subject itself. As a
    network, the World Wide Web provides the means for a virtually
    direct and diversified interactivity, flexible and advanced
    distribution of information, and greater possibilities for the
    integration of art, technology, and social life. The technological
    possibilities of the new media, what Sean Cubitt has referred to as
    the ‘transience’ (as opposed to the ‘ephemerality’) of media arts,
    compel us to abandon the notion that artworks are stable isolated
    objects, and challenge the rights, economies, and forms of
    production traditionally associated with them... the new media makes
    us aware of how our experience of the world as such was always
    already minimally virtual in the sense that a whole set of symbolic
    presuppositions determine our sense of reality. "[4] <#eID4>

    "Third, the reconfigured context of contemporary art prompts a
    thorough reconsideration of the avant-garde.... [Peter Bürger] an
    avant-garde worth defending is one that seeks to reconnect artistic
    practices with the lifeworld in order to transform the latter ...
    [Okwui Enwezor] avant-garde ‘of limited use’ in the present, seeing
    it as doing ‘little to constitute a space of self- reflexivity that
    can understand new relations of artistic modernity not founded on
    Westernism’ ... [Bourriaud] Others have proposed that the
    avant-garde promise of aesthetic equality has re-emerged in the form
    of a ‘relational aesthetics’ by artists who make work out of social
    interactions—work that engages, and is made out of, social
    communities.... [Ranciere] shifts the focus away from the pursuit of
    rupture, the new, and progress (whether political or artistic) to
    the notion that the avant-garde aesthetically anticipates the future
    by actualising ‘sensible forms and material structures for a life to
    come’. ... A resurgence of interest (in the art world at least) in
    concepts of utopia, community, collaboration, participation, and
    responsible government, all of which encode a desire for change, has
    accompanied these new notions of the avant-garde. "[4] <#eID4>

    "Fourth and finally, the new period is witnessing the surprising
    re-emergence of a philosophical aesthetics that seeks to find the
    ‘specific’ nature of aesthetic experience as such. ... [the artist]
    is valuing affect and experience rather than interpretation and
    meaning—rather than contextually grounding and understanding the
    work and its conditions of possibility. "[4] <#eID4>

    "“We human beings represent a natural system that evolves
    progressively from the apparently simple to the very complex [...]
    Yet our tendency is to look ‘top down’ and put ourselves at the
    center of the universe” “Today, because of technological advances,
    we are instead progressively and collectively experiencing a new way
    of being and it is not orchestrated from the center by a single
    authority” "[68] <#eID68>

Toop claims that the Internet --as a self-propagating, decentralized
web-- has expanded dramatically ideas previously developed in the 20th
century (composer-audience relationships, chance, accident, feedback
systems, self-generating, adaptive mechanisms, abdication of control,
environmental modelling of music, music itself). He exemplifies this
with the sound installation called "Sound Drifting", which was about
'networking, communication and collab oration; about control-sharing
between artists, users and machins.... about listening to the work
without adding to it... about the aesthetics of different but
connectable sounds, images, texts appearing on line... as fugitive
interfaces to a complex, invisible and not yet properly understood
system of data processing"

    "This raises some of the core issues challenged by 20th century
    music and 20th century thougth in general: the relationship of the
    composer oto the audience, for example, or the use of chance and
    accident in the creation of music; the construction of feedback
    systems or self-generatiinig and adaptive mechanism that shape
    sound; the exertion or abdication of control of a musical resul; the
    modelling of music based on ecosystems and similar complex
    environments and the setting in motion of events that qustion the
    definition of music as a cultural pdroduction distinguished from
    noise or unorganised sound by human agency and intentionality. In
    the 21st century ,such ideas have been expanded dramatically by the
    evolution of the Internet, itself a self-propagating Web lacking any
    central control. Sound Drifting was a large scale generative sound
    installation curated by Colin Fallows and Heidi Grundmann for the
    Ars Ee.lectronica 99 festival. ... "there has been a growing
    interest in generative systems by artists working with the Internet,
    especially using sound, but increasingly with the appropriation of
    games sogtware, search engines and so forth. ... But the most
    conspicuous cultural use of generative systems has been in the field
    of music... S.D was about networking, communication and
    collaboration; about control-sharing between artists, users and
    machines; about letting go of one's own art and making ecological
    use of exissting things; about listening to the work without adding
    to it; ... about the aesthetics of different but connectable sounds,
    images, texts appearing on line --on air-- on site as fugitive
    interfaces to a complex, invisible and not yet properly understood
    system of data processing" "[63] <#eID63>

For Varese, machines "can only give back what we put into them"

    "The computing machine is a marvelous invention and seems almost
    superhuman. But in reality it is as limited as the mind of the
    individual who feeds it material. Like the computer, the machines we
    use for making music can only give back what we put into them. "[67]
    <#eID67>


        Conceptual Art

    "Marcel Duchamps’ dictum of concept over object in art and his
    eventual decision to give up painting entirely in order to become a
    freelance librarian [...] drew attention to the intersection of
    information and aesthetics "[68] <#eID68>


        Crisis

    "The musical avant-garde thus inhabits several contradictions. On
    the one hand, being no longer marginal and critical of the dominant
    order as in the earlier period of modernism, but itself established,
    it has not only undermined its initial raison d'être but it must
    also continually legitimize its present position of official subsidy
    in the absence of a large audience. On the other hand, it continues
    to promote an avant-garde view of history in which the present state
    of things is denigrated in promise of greater things to come, of
    advancing the future of music.... The case of IRCAM illuminates
    these questions well since IRCAM represents an extreme of legitimacy
    and subsidy in the contemporary music world: it is a uniquely
    authoritative and well-funded institution. Yet rather than an
    aberrant development, IRCAM is the outcome of certain converging, if
    distings, historical processes and can be seen to epitomize
    contemporary musical modernism. "[10] <#eID10>


        Data

    "the hybrid and collaborative nature of art using digital
    technologies as a medium also questions established practices of
    institutions such as museums, funding organizations, and the art
    world at large "[-1] <#eID-1>

    "Data coulb be endlessly manipulated and stored in databases or
    archives to be called up for a myriad of uses within numerous
    contexts and disciplines, especially with regard to long-distance
    communications. "[35] <#eID35>

    "Digital technologies change the nature of interatcion itself.
    Digital functionality -- such as algorithmic caltculations,
    databases, and telecommunications -- transforma work of art into a
    dynamic environment... "[35] <#eID35>

    "Every 'container' of information -- be it a library, a building, or
    a city -- essentially constitutes a dataspace and information
    architecture of its own... "[53] <#eID53>

    "The underlying concept nd structure of these visualization projects
    are the archive and database, which are key elements in mapping and
    our understanding of digital culture. During the 1990s, digital
    archives and databases developed into what could be seen as a
    cultural form. From the digitization of libraries, historical
    records, and museum collections to data collection for commercial
    purposees and the INternet as a gigantic data storage and retrieval
    system, archives and databases have become an essential form of
    cultural organization and memory. "[53] <#eID53>

    "Databases in themselves are essentially a fairly dull affair,
    consisting of discrete units that are not necessarily meaningful.
    The power of databases consists in their relational potential, the
    possibility of establishing multiple connections between different
    sets of data and constructing narratives about cultures "[53] <#eID53>

    "ONe of the inherent characteristics of digital art is the tension
    between the hierarchical structure of instructions and data sets and
    the seemingly infinite possibilities for reproducing and
    reconfiguring the information contained within these structures
    "[53] <#eID53>

    "from the 1990s to the twenty-first century, artistic practive in
    the field of database aesthetics and data visualization has
    undergone a significant shift. Projects in the 1990s and early 2000s
    often experimented with the dynamic mapping of the Internet as
    territory or specific data sets or networked communication. The Web
    2.0 era brought forth the phenomenon of big data, collections of
    data sets sos complex that they require new software tools for
    capture, search, analysis, and visualization. Big data analytics,
    the process of examining big data to uncover hidden patterns and
    unknown correlations also became a subject in art. "[53] <#eID53>

    "In the digital age, the concept of 'disembodiment' does not only
    apply to our physical ody but also to notions of the object and
    materiality in general. Information itself to a large extent seems
    to have lost its 'body', becoming an abstract 'quelity' that can
    make a fluid transition between different states of materiality. ...
    data are not necessarily attached to a specific form of
    manifestation. Information and data sets are intrinsically virtual,
    that is, they exist as processes that are not necessarily visible or
    graspable, such as the transferral and transmission of data via
    networks. The meaningfulness of data relies on possibilities of
    filtering the information and creating some form of organizing
    structure or 'map' -- be it mental or visual -- that can allow for
    orientation. "[53] <#eID53>

    " The digital simulation capabilities of the computer create a break
    with the paradigm of representation we have followed since the
    Renaissance. The computer has the capability of combining sound,
    text, and image within a single database. Images no longer reside in
    the visual field but in the database of the computer (see Chapter
    5). To see an image, information about the image’s structure of
    lights and darks must be called up for display. The image is thus an
    information structure which has no physical presence in the real
    world. Not only is it a dematerialized image, but it is also one
    which can be destabilized and constantly invaded, changed, and
    manipulated by a viewer interactively through software commands.
    This possibility for intervention and interaction challenges notions
    of a discrete work of art, one that is authored by the artist alone.
    An interactive work is one which uses branching systems and networks
    for creating connective links and nodes. The artist who decides to
    work with technology now assumes a different role in relationship to
    creating work, one similar to a systems designer, and the work takes
    on a different route in relationship to the viewer who participates
    in the work’s ultimate unfolding and meaning. "[36] <#eID36>

    "Lev Manovich, in his The Language of New Media, discusses the
    database as the center of the creative process in the computer
    age.11 He sees it as a new symbolic form – as “the projection of the
    ontology of the computer into culture itself.” He speaks about
    modern media as a battleground between a system which relied first
    and foremost on the narrative form and the new culture based on the
    database: “After the novel, and subsequently cinema, privileged
    narrative as the key form of cultural expression of the modern age,
    the computer age introduces its correlate – the database.”12 "[36]
    <#eID36>

    "Datafication -- transforming all things under the sun into a data
    format and thus quantifying them -- is at the heart of the networked
    world. Data are also at the centre of our media practices: data feed
    the many applications we use on a variety of platforms, they flow
    from users and devices to services and platforms, making connections
    and scaling audiences at an unprecedented rate. Networked
    connectivity runs on data -- the new oil of the information economy.
    Just as electricity changed industrial processes and domestic
    practices in the nineteenth century, a data-driven paradigm will
    constitute the core of twenty-first-century processes and practices.
    It is therefore no surprise that data have moved to the centre of
    media research and have become protagonists in media narratives.
    "[66] <#eID66>

    "These, then, are the five relatively modern classes of sound
    poetry: (1) works in an invented language, (2) near-nonsense works,
    (3) phatic poems, (4) unwritten-out poems, and (5) notated ones.
    Obviously some of the modern works being generated today still fall
    within the three classes I described earlier in older sound poetry:
    (1) folk vaietis, (2) onomatopoetic or mimetic pieces, and (3)
    nonsensee poetries which trope their own languages. "[26] <#eID26>

    "my work increasingly became informed by my realization of how
    databases are shaping our collective reality. As soon as I started
    exploring the Internet as a creative space in 1993, I was confronted
    with large sets of data. ... My goal is to give a sense of context
    that artists respond to by observing, critiquing, and directly
    engaging the infrastructures of databases in our creative work,
    exposing the invisiible realm that is rarely connected to the idead
    of creativity and even less to any kind of aesthetics. "[23] <#eID23>

    "... data--driven practices have been part of the emerging
    information society since the nineteenth century( Beniger 1989;
    Porter 1996; Campbell-Kelly 2003)... "[59] <#eID59>

    "...the operations of searching, sorting, filtering, indexing and
    classifying which before were within the strict domain of human
    intelligence become automated.... the new aesthetic possibilities
    offered by computer recording are immense and unprecedented ....
    Godard's History of Cinema (1998) represents an important step
    towards such database cinema. Godard treats the whole history of
    cinema as his source material, traversing this database back and
    forth, like a virtual camera flying over a landscappe made from old
    media. , "[40] <#eID40>

    "Int he computerized paradigm, humans are perceived as information,
    as evidenced by both the Visible Human Project and the Human Genome
    Project, or as information-processing entities. In both cases the
    ":human" is abstracted from the larger social conditions we occupy.
    If we juxtapose these asumptions with late capitalism, moving away
    from durable product to information, we can easily translate this to
    the art world's dematerialization of the object. We could celebrate
    this event as as victory of conceptiual moevemnts or see it as a
    dangerous intersection where information about us is being
    colelcted, stored, and databased without the opportunity for us to
    choose, or to know, or too accept either its worth or its
    consequences. "[68] <#eID68>

    "I believe that an active engagement with data models and databases
    is an important aspect of working in this medium. Through my
    collaborations with scientists, I have tried to learn as much as
    possible about the data in order to translate it more effectively. I
    have also combined sonifications with interviews with scientists,
    articles, and other textual information in order to add context and
    meaning to the work. Brett Stalbaum sees the database not as a
    static subject on which an artist projects meaning, or even as a
    malleable piece of 'clay' transformed by an artist. He sees it as a
    'catalyzing factor in the conversation'. He optimistically states
    that 'data and control systems provide a channel through which
    ecosystems are able to express an influence in favor of their own
    protection'. However, in order for the expression of the data to be
    heard, he have to be listening. "[55] <#eID55>

    ""Violin Power" can be characterized as a dynamic 'reading'; of a
    database -- the video clips randomly accessed on the videodisc - and
    is precisely what Manovich discusses in relation to the database as
    a 'new symbolic form' and artistic practive in the 21st century.
    "[17] <#eID17>

    "Tools now aid composers in the deconstruction of digital files:
    exploring the sonic possibilities of a Photoshop file that displays
    an image of a flower, trawling word processning documents in search
    of coherent bytes of sound, using noise-reduction sofware to analyze
    and process audio in ways that the software designer never intended.
    Any selection of algorithms can be interfaced to pass data back and
    forth, mapping effortlessly from one dimension into another. In this
    way, all data can become fodder for sonic experimentation. "[12]
    <#eID12>

    "until quite recently I used to hear it so often in regard to my own
    works that, as far back as the twenties, I decided to call my music
    "organized sound" and myself, not a musician, but a "worker in
    rhythms, frequencies, and intensities." Indeed, to stubbornly
    conditioned ears, anything new in music has always been called
    noise. But after all, what is music but organized noises? And a
    composer, like all artists, is an organizer of disparate elements.
    Subjectively, noise is any sound one doesn't like. "[67] <#eID67>

    "... black boxing is not an obstacle of transparency here, but the
    primary condition for its very possibility. Applying this notion of
    transparency to algorithmic black boxes would only be half the
    solution as it does not provide means to position oneself critically
    towards what is inside the box. This concept however hass a long
    tradition in the philosophy of technology, and has actually always
    been an ideal of meadia and media practices. It is here that we find
    an understanding of transparency and its limits that allows for the
    critical position we seek. ((((continue to page 144 cause it's
    good)))) "[52] <#eID52>


        Database

    "“Following art historian Erwin Panofsky’s analysis of linear
    perspective as a “symbolic form” of the modern age, we may even call
    database a new symbolic form of a computer age (or, as philoso- pher
    Jean-François Lyotard called it in his famous 1979 book Postmodern
    Condition, “computerized society,”2 a new way to structure our
    experience of ourselves and of the world. Indeed, if, after the
    death of God (Friedrich Nietzsche), the end of grand Narratives of
    Enlightenment (Lyotard), and the arrival of the World Wide Web (Tim
    Berners-Lee), the world appears to us as an endless and unstructured
    collection of images, texts, and other data records, it is only
    appropriate that we will be moved to model it as a data- base—but it
    is also appropriate that we would want to develop the poetics,
    aesthetics, and ethics of this database.” "[39] <#eID39>

    "the antinarrative logic of the Web.... If new elements are being
    added over time, the result is a collection, not a story. Indeed,
    how can one keep a coherent narrative or any other development
    trajectory through the material if it keeps changing? "[39] <#eID39>

    "The similarity between the actions expected from the player and
    computer algorithms is too uncanny to be dismissed. While computer
    games do not follow database logic, they appear to be ruled by
    another logic—that of an algorithm. They demand that a player
    executes an algorithm in order to win. "[39] <#eID39>

    "What we encounter here is an example of the general principle of
    new media: the projection of the ontology of a computer onto culture
    itself.... The world is reduced to two kinds of software objects
    that are complemen- tary to each other: data structures and
    algorithms. "[39] <#eID39>

    "Algorithms and data struc- tures have a symbiotic relationship. The
    more complex the data structure of a computer program, the simpler
    the algorithm needs to be, and vice versa. Together, according to a
    computer, data structures and algorithms are two halves of the
    ontology of the world. The computerization of culture involves the
    projection of these two fun- damental parts of computer software—and
    of the computer’s unique ontol- ogy—onto the cultural sphere. "[39]
    <#eID39>

    "It may appear at first sight that data are passive and algorithm is
    active—... the passive/active distinction is not quite accurate
    because data do not just exist—they have to be generated.... Texts
    need to be written, photographs need to be taken, video and audio
    need to be recorded— or they need to be digitized "[39] <#eID39>

    "Database becomes the center of the creative process in the computer
    age. ... With new media, the content of the work and the interface
    becomes separate. ... The new media object consists of one or more
    interfaces to a database of multimedia material. ... However, in the
    world of new media, the word “narrative” is often used as an
    all-inclusive term to cover up the fact that we have not yet
    developed a language to describe these new strange objects. ... In
    new media, the database supports a variety of cultural forms that
    range from direct translation (a database stays a database) to a
    form whose logic is the opposite of the logic of the material form
    itself—a narrative. More pre- cisely, a database can support
    narrative, but there is nothing in the logic of the medium itself
    that would foster its generation. It is not surprising, then, that
    databases occupy a significant, if not the largest, territory of the
    new media landscape. What is more surprising is why the other end of
    the spec- trum—narratives—still exists in new media. "[39] <#eID39>

Syntagmatic and Paradigmatic dimensions

    "the elements of a system can be related on two dimensions:
    syntagmatic and paradigmatic. As defined by Barthes, “The syntagm is
    a combination of signs, which has space as a support.” “in a linear
    sequence. “ “In Saussure’s original formulation, “The units which
    have something in common are associated in theory and thus form
    groups within which various relationships can be found.... the
    database of choices from which narrative is constructed (the
    paradigm) is implicit, while the actual narrative (the syntagm) is
    explicit. New media reverses this relationship. Database (the
    paradigm) is given material existence, while narrative (the syntagm)
    is dematerialized. Para- digm is privileged; syntagm is downplayed.
    Paradigm is real; syntagm is vir- tual. ... On the material level, a
    narrative is just a set of links; the elements themselves remain
    stored in the database. Thus, the narrative is more virtual than the
    database itself.16 "[39] <#eID39>

    "Working to undermine a linear narrative, Greenaway uses different
    systems to order his films. He wrote about this approach: “If a
    numerical, alphabetic color-coding system is employed, it is done
    deliberately as a device, a construct, to counteract, dilute,
    augment or complement the all-pervading obsessive cinema interest in
    plot, in narrative, in the ‘I am now going to tell you a story’
    school of film-making.”23 His favorite system is numbers. ...Along
    with Greenaway, Dziga Vertov can be thought of as a major “data-
    base filmmaker” of the twentieth century. His film Man with a Movie
    Camera "[39] <#eID39>

    "I find Manovich’s criterion of narrative too stringent, [...]
    arrative can be retooled in the light of the database: that the new
    media open an opportunity for rethink- ing the notion of narrative,
    rather... Rushdie’s Ocean is itself a database—a database with
    narratives as data. Ocean fulfills two basic criteria of the
    database: (1) it is composed of smaller elements, the story
    currents; and (2) it can be traversed in a mul- tiplicity of ways.
    ... The elements of the Ocean database are stories. However,
    according to Manovich, a narrative is already a specific method of
    navigating a database, in that the shape of the path through the
    data endows a story with its narrative structure.6 But now the
    question is more urgent: What are we navigating through so that a
    story is constructed? What are the elements of a story? For Manovich
    these elementary particles are images and sounds or linguistic
    granules. For him a story is constructed from textual components.
    ... Events, not their descriptions, make a story: the story remains
    separate from its telling. This is why there can be different
    versions of the same story. Narrative structure arises from events,
    agents, locations, and relationships among and between them, the
    components of a real or imag- ined world described by the narrator’s
    words or depicted by the narrator’s images. ... My suggestion is
    that narrative and database are in different categories, so they do
    not fall into the binary opposition that Manovich asserts. "[71]
    <#eID71>

    "A view, a navigation, or a search always results in an order... A
    database, in itself, does not present data: it con- tains data. The
    data must always be in an arrangement in order to be read. And it
    must be the arrangement that gives the data its meaning. What can
    Manovich mean when he says that a database “presents a model of what
    the world is like”? How would a database have meaning? ... My thesis
    is that the database form abounds with such expressive
    possibilities, largely un- explored—for example, in the very fact
    that a database can be a region of alternative story constructs
    "[71] <#eID71>

    "The first step in working with a database is the collection and
    assembly of the data. The presentation of the database involves
    sorting and filtering so that some of the data is shown, some
    omitted. Sorting determines the sequence of presentation, while
    filtering gives rules for admission into the set presented. ... only
    a portion of the material goes through this process [...] resulting
    in a database that is a subset of the “shot material” data- base.
    Editing is selecting from the database and sequencing the
    selections. ... For a filmmaker, database thinking is liberation—one
    is freed to let the material breathe.[...] To go further: for a
    filmmaker the term “cutting,” as “editing,” loses its meaning, and
    “sorting,” “assembling,” and “mapping” become more apt metaphors for
    the activity of composition. "[71] <#eID71>

Manovich traces the origin of discretization of modern media to the
Industrial Revolution, when the factory system gradually replaced
artisan labor. After Ford's assembly line, which relied on two
principles: the standarization of parts and the separation of the
production process into simple, repetitive and sequential sets of
activities (performed by an easily replaceable worker). This overall
standarization process, or'logic of the factory' transverses through
material organization. Manovich presents the typesetting machines as an
example of how type design and fonts are subject to this standarization.
He also mentions image dimensions and temporal sampling rate, in the
case of cinema. The notion of mass-standarization and reproducibility of
modern media is differentiated from the logic of post-industrial
society, which favors individual customization.

    "First, data is sampled, most often at regular intervals, such as
    the grid of pixels used to represent a digital image. The frequency
    of sampling is referred to as resolution. Sampling turns continuous
    data into discrete data [...]. Second, each sample is quantified,
    that is, it is assigned a numerical value drawn from a defined range
    (such as 0-255 in the case of an 8-bit greyscale image) "[40] <#eID40>

    "An embodied approach to computing acknowledges the importance of
    the physicality of experience as it falls within the continuum that
    bridges the physical with the digital. "[60] <#eID60>

    " The database in my case is used to navigate the open potentials of
    poetic expression, dynamic association through human process, and
    emergent meaning arising out of these processes. "[60] <#eID60>

    "I have approached the aesthetic and operative nature of the
    database for more than twenty years in my artistic practice. ...I
    have focused on meta-meaning production using navigation and
    combinatorial strate- gies across a series of technological
    substrates. ... Through interaction ←→ intra-action, one can witness
    meaning as it is being formed and changed based on individual and
    group involvement. ... Participants function in a unity with the
    media through interaction, ... By operating on the media-elements in
    the works, they derive or better create emergent meaning ... For
    each database-related work, one must define a classification system
    or set of systems to enable specific media-elements to become
    operative in a meaningful manner. "[60] <#eID60>

    "“DNA is probably the most beautiful example of database aesthetics
    and certainly points to the importance of grasping the efficiency
    and beauty of design that nature employs in all of life” "[68] <#eID68>

    "From identifying the remains of soldiers, to deciding paternity
    cases, to eliminating (and often convicting) criminal suspects, DNA
    testing has become a powerful new weapon in the layer’s arsenal
    ...The Federal Bureau of Investigation has created a national
    database of genetic information called the National DNA Index
    System. "[68] <#eID68>

    "Dissecting the human flesh into millimeter pieces, digitizing, and
    posting on the Internet is at once useful for research and also a
    portrait of the way the Western medical community has removed itself
    from the human soul behind the body, which all too frequently is
    viewed as a machine. "[68] <#eID68>

    "In the computerized paradigm, humans are perceived as information
    [...] or as information-processing entities. In both cases, the
    ‘human’ is abstracted from the larger social conditions we occupy.
    If we juxtapose these assumptions with late capitalism, moving away
    from durable product to information, we can easily translate this to
    the art world’s dematerialisation of the object. We could celebrate
    this event as a victory of conceptual movements or see it as a
    dangerous intersection where information about us is being
    collected, stored, and databased without the opportunity for us to
    choose, or to know, or to accept either its worth or its
    consequences. "[68] <#eID68>

    "I became obsessed with thinking how online ‘bodies’ could be
    represented in the vast networked information space without losing
    identity or becoming static pages on the Web. When we datamine the
    data of a person, how do we connect to the fact that this is a
    flesh-and-blood individual? "[68] <#eID68>

    "in addition to the Chronofile, which is considered to be the heart
    of his archives, he left behind the Dymaxion index, blueprints,
    photos, patents, manuscripts, and a large amount of random elements.
    He saved all his correspondences, sketches, doodles made during his
    meetings, backs of envelopes, and newspaper-edged notes --everything
    possible that was a record of his thought. He save all films,
    videos, wire and tape recordings, and posters announcing his
    lectures, awards, mementoes, relevant books, everything he published
    at various stages, all indexes, drafting tools, typewriters,
    computers, furniture, file cabinets, paintings, photos, diplomas,
    and cartoons. [...] Fuller is a great example of someone who becomes
    more and more ambitious to document not only himself but also the
    world around him in the form of a database. "[68] <#eID68>

    "Documentation of an artist’s life is an investment in the future of
    the personae that will continue to survive in the form of
    information. Collecting, storing, and archiving is very much
    connected to time, to our anxiety over the loss of time, and to the
    speed at which time travels. We preserve the all-important self in
    this age of relentless movement by creating a memory bank that
    testifies to our existence, our unique contribution. "[68] <#eID68>

    "This digital reorganization means we can anticipate the relatively
    fast-paced demand for, and creation of, new systems and
    establishments. Artists are in a unique position to participate in
    this process as ‘information architects’ using data as raw material
    ... How one moves through physical space [...] is very much
    determined by the way an architect has conceived it... When
    navigating through various software ‘containers’ and inputting our
    data, we are in effect following the established parameters of
    information architecture "[68] <#eID68>

    "database is now commonly understood as a computerized record-
    keeping system, it is essentially a structured collection of data
    that stands in the tradition of “data containers” such as a book, a
    library, an archive, or Wunderkammer. "[54] <#eID54>

    "Data models always contain a layer of mathematical algorithms and
    concepts ... • Hierarchical Databases, which arrange the data in
    hierarchies similar to a tree structure with parent/child
    relationships. • Network Databases, which are still close to the
    hierarchical model but use “sets” to establish a hierarchy that
    allows children to have more than one parent and thus establishes
    many-to-many relationships. • Relational Databases, the most common
    form, are based on the research of Dr. E. F. Codd at IBM in the late
    1960s and rely on the concept of tables (so-called relations) that
    store all data. Contrary to hierarchical or network databases,
    relational ones do not require a close understanding of how exactly
    information within the database is structured since each table can
    be identified by a unique name that can be called and found by the
    database. • Client/Server Databases, which come in various forms and
    allow multiple “clients” to remotely and simultaneously access and
    retrieve information from a database server around the clock. •
    Object-Oriented Databases, which are designed to work well with
    object-oriented programming languages (such Java and C++) and make
    entries (objects) in the database appear as programming language
    objects in one or more languages. "[54] <#eID54>

    "Any visual, digital image— from print to video—has ultimately been
    produced by instructions and the software that was used to create or
    manipulate it. ... “back end” of algorithms and data sets that
    remain hidden and a visible “front end” that is experienced by the
    viewer/user, the latter being produced by the former. ...
    understanding of “database aesthetics” seems to be more focused on
    the operations on the “front end" ... tension between the mostly
    linear and hierarchical structure of databases ... and instructions,
    on the one hand, and, on the other, the seemingly infinite
    possibili- ties for reproducing and reconfiguring the information
    contained within these structures. "[54] <#eID54>

    "The aesthetics of a database are inherently relational, be it on
    the level of potential (the data container being its carrier) or the
    actual relationships established by the software ... tracing
    process—individual, cultural, communicative—in its various forms.
    ... questioned the conventions of exploring the Web through browsers
    ... revealed the Internet”s “database architecture” in a new way.
    ... new media [...] ultimately always is a visualization of data, be
    it a “closed” database with a preconfigured, limited amount of
    materials or an open one that organizes real-time data flux. The
    visualization and “dynamic mapping” of real-time data streams ...
    projects has been tracing cultural subtexts by means of arranging
    informa- tion in a database that then become a means of revealing
    meta-narratives about cultural values and conventions.” ... Art
    projects frequently apply the principles and logic of the database
    to existing, often originally analog information "[54] <#eID54>

    "The term “data” originated as the plural of the Latin word datum,
    meaning “something given.”1 In the world of experience, our datum is
    a culturally constructed social context. "[15] <#eID15>

    "Hayles’s “Informatics” includes “the late capitalist mode of
    flexible accumulation; the hardware and software that have merged
    telecommunications with computer technology; and the patterns of
    living that emerge from and depend upon instant transmission of
    information and access to large data banks." "[15] <#eID15>

Cellular Automata, self-evolving or emergent systems

    "models for rethinking representation and authorship in the
    epistemology of autopoiesis, and emergent systems called cellular
    automata. These models move beyond the interpretation of
    “uncertainty” as the collapse of the separation between subject and
    object— the death of the author—and posit multiple differentiations,
    and proliferating perspectives—emergent dialogism. ... "[15] <#eID15>

    "Here water, archi- tecture, commerce, and tourism comprise a system
    that is both emergent and immersive: a physical and historical
    “collaborative system.”... Jameson Quote: “‘With the breakdown of
    the signifying chain, therefore, the schizophrenic is reduced to an
    experience of pure material signifiers, or, in other words, a series
    of pure and unrelated presents in time’ (ibid.). To “lose one’s way”
    in the city would be oxymoronic—it is the condition of being in
    Venice, as such. ... The construction of Venice was an expres- sion
    of power—the desire to dominate nature for the sake of commerce and
    control. Composed of incompatible elements, the flickering
    insubstan- tiality of its fluid markers, names and traces, Venice
    teeters on the brink of submission—power giving way to
    impossibility. "[15] <#eID15>

    "along with Nicholas Mosley, we may ask: “Might there not be an
    anthropology in which the observer is seen as part of what he
    observes ... Database aesthetics can provide a free space, a field
    for dynamic interaction. But this field, unfortunately, may be
    framed and the data may be organized around existing narratives of
    cultural domination and patterns of objectification. ... the
    aesthetics of the database must be practiced or applied in
    conjunction with a commitment to cultural democ- racy and linked to
    an “aesthetics of dignity." "[15] <#eID15>

    "Mapping is intersubjective communication: the visualization or
    repre- sentation of data and information. ... Intersubjective
    communication occurs when the meaning of data or information is
    accessible to, or established for, two or more subjects. ... To map
    social and cultural experience accurately re- quires infrastructures
    and interfaces that facilitate intersubjective commu- nication,
    favor dialogue over monologue, and allow representations and
    interpretations to emerge and evolve—an infrastructure like the
    database. "[15] <#eID15>

    "In what you have just read, I have traversed a field of data and
    activated a set of associations: the death of the author and the
    role of the observer; the aesthetics of the database; parallels
    among complex social and collabo- rative systems; social aesthetics
    in the context of the materiality of infor- matics; the emergence of
    the collective-narrating-participant-subject; and the philosophy of
    an activist aesthetics of dignity. I hope these associations emerge
    as a new ontology of aesthetics that will change and transform the
    structure of that field. "[15] <#eID15>

    "Just as a fractal has the same structure on different scales, a new
    media object has the same modular structure throughout. Media
    elements [...] are represented as collections of discrete samples.
    "[41] <#eID41>

For Manovich, the threshold of this analogy with computer programs
depends on the operativity of the program. On both cases, one can
access, modify, substitute and delete parts of the object. However,
while a computer program may fail to execute if an essential part of it
is missing or misplaced, this is not the case for a new media object. In
this particular case, Manovich equates 'new media object' with an HTML
document (or a Photoshop project), and 'parts' with editable lines of
code (or editable layers).

    "Structural computer programming, which became a standard in the
    1970s, involves writing small and self-sufficient modules (called in
    different computer languages subroutines, functions, procedures,
    scripts), which are then assembled into larger programs. Many new
    media objects are in fact computer programs that follow structural
    programming style. "[41] <#eID41>

Manovich talks about low-level and high-level automation of media
creation. The distinction of these is in the level of complexity and the
scale of the generated part. While in the former he includes image
processing algorithms (filters, color variation), physical modelling
(fire, waterfalls) and mathematical modelling (swarms), in the latter
the automation depends on the ability of a computer to 'understand' the
'semantics' of the generated objects, as is the case with artificial
intelligence within computer games.

    "The numerical coding of media and the modular structure of a media
    object allow for the automation of many operations involved in media
    creation, manipulation, and access. Thus human intentionality can be
    removed from the creative process, at least in part. "[41] <#eID41>

There is a turning point when he writes about the emergence of new media
and the accesibility within a growing database. So, I believe there is a
need to combine these high and low automation processes into the
accessing of the elements of a database. A computer can not only
classify and categorize the data but also 'understand' the data semantics.

    "The switch to computers as a means of storing and accessing
    enourmous amounts of media material [...] created the need to find
    more efficient ways to classify and search media objects. "[41] <#eID41>

The fact that for the user the database appears as a collection of items
she can perform with is what places it next to traditional forms of art

    "Similarly, a literary or cinematic narrative, anarchitectural plan,
    and a database each present a different model of what a world is
    like......... It is this sense of database as a cultural form of its
    own that I want to address here "[41] <#eID41>

    "Thus just as a database form can be seen as an expression of a
    'database complex', an irrational desire to preserve and store
    everything, navigable space is not just a purely functional
    interface. It is also an expression and gratification of a
    psychological desire, a state of being, a subject position -or
    rather, a subject's trajetory. If the subject of modenr society
    looked for refuge from the chaos of the real world in the stability
    and balance of the static composition of a painting, and later in
    the cinematic image, the subject of the information society finds
    peace in the knowledge that she can slide over endles fields of
    data, locating any morsel of information with the click of a button,
    zooming through file systems and networks. She is conforted not by
    the equilibrium of shapes and colors, but by the variety of data
    manipulation operations at her control. "[41] <#eID41>

    "As defined by Barthes, "The syntagm is a combination of signs,
    which has space as a support". To use the example of natural
    language, the speaker produces an utterance by stringing together
    elements, one after another, in a linear sequence. This is the
    syntagmatic dimension. Now let us look at the paradigmatic
    dimension. To continue with the example of the language user, each
    new element is chosen from a set of other related elements. For
    instance, all nouns form a set; all synonyms of a particular word
    form another set. In the original formulation of Saussure, "The
    units which have something in common are associated in theory and
    thus form groups within which various relationships can be found".
    This is the paradigmatic dimension "[41] <#eID41>

    "syntagm is explicit and paradigm is implicit; one is real and the
    other is imagined. Literary and cinematic narratives work in the
    same way. Particular words, sentences, shots, and scenes that make
    up a narrative have a material existence; other elements that form
    the imaginary world of an author or a particular literary or
    cinematic style, and that could have appeared instead, exist only
    virtually. Put differently, the database of choices from which
    narrative is constructed (the paradigm) is implicit; while the
    actual narrative (the syntagm) is explicit. New media reverse this
    relationship. Database (the paradigm) is given material existence,
    while narrative (the syntagm) is dematerialised. Paradigm is
    privileged, syntagm is downplayed. Paradigm is real; syntagm,
    virtual. ... The narrative is constructed by linking elements of
    this database in a particular order, that is by designin a
    trajectory leading from one element to another. On the material
    level, a narrative is just a set of links; the elements themselves
    remain stored in the database. Thus the narrative is virtual while
    the database exists materially. "[41] <#eID41>

    "Our civilization has reshaped data into a form of storytelling....
    [the death of dramatic structure] or at least the end of a narrative
    culture dominated by drama and melodrama.... unease of data today
    (to reinforce terrorism, surveillance, military adventurism) brings
    serious challenges for the media arts. How should we adapt
    “data-driven” story to our tense condition as of 2007... a new
    strategy for data story points toward a new beginning for all forms
    of narrative, like the origins of the novel ... “Story” is a
    sculpting of madness. But what is the madness of data in our
    culture? ... Data, through media, must turn into a form of erasure,
    not blood- curdling realism. ... Data remind us that we are being
    colonized by our own economy, outsourced and psychologically
    invaded. "[29] <#eID29>

Data as absence

    "Story is generally organized through absence [...] absence is a
    kind of aperture. ... Photos should not illustrate. They should
    reveal the gap ... historical models, absence is the gap between a
    fact and a collective lie, ... architecture, absence is the space
    where unfinish is revealed [...] fissure that reveals traces of old
    mistakes,[...]erasures[...]the void between data and plot points....
    each medium is magnificently endowed with absence.[...]absence is
    what the medium [...] cannot deliver. "[29] <#eID29>

    "Fielding understood digression in much the same way, as an
    archiectural journey through what Lev Manovich calls “navigable
    spaces.” ... The computer changes the role of the reader, as in a
    scripted space. In new forms of data story, the reader imagines her-
    self as a central character. The reader identifies with the first
    line not yet written, with the making of a story—much more than with
    the “ending,” which can be contrived anyway. Or as Bertolt Brecht
    called it, plot points as sausage links. Simply put, data story on
    the computer is a picaresque filled with apho- risms, with pieces of
    narrative that never “fill in the blanks.” Meanwhile, the reader
    gets immersed in all this “atmospheric” data. Next, the reader
    evolves pleasantly into the author. Finally, instead of an ending,
    the reader imagines herself about to start writing—like the player
    adding a new “mod." "[29] <#eID29>


        Image

    "Deleuze makes another distinction in his taxonomy of film history,
    as he takes his idea of modern and classic cinema one step further
    and distinguishes between 'organic' and 'crystalline' cinema. He
    builds this other level of distinguion though his idea of a crysstal
    image of which opsigns are silvers. A crystal imiage is the point of
    indiscernibility when there is a 'coalescence of the actual image
    and the virtual image, the image with two sides, actual adn virtual
    at the same time' (deleuze, cinema2,p69). The crystalline regime is
    made up of these kinds of images and is distinguished from its
    ontological counterpart called organic cinema, from which it emerges
    in three ways. ... evokes images as descriptions without their
    normal linkages to a motor event that would usually follow ....
    confouonds the relation between the real and the imaginary and
    instead invokes the terms actual and virtual. ... develeops
    narration out of anomalies, irregultarities, and false continuity
    rather than the field of forces, oppositions, and tensions that
    normally characterize the organic regime. "[50] <#eID50>

    "Networked relations in the real workd configure network erelations
    in the brain. Photography, cinema, and now new media have done much
    to change the way time and space are encoded into t he networked
    relations of the world, and have done much to reconfigure the real
    world intoareal/virtual interface. Fields of phatic signifiers have
    been artificaially created to capture the attention of the human
    observer. Utilizing a strategy I hav etermed cognitve ergonomics,
    arttificial stimuli have been ergineered to have superior
    attention-grabbing capabilities beyond their naturally created
    counterparts. As such, these artificial stimuli compete more
    effectively for neural space as they configure superior neural
    network configurations that are faster and more efficient. THere
    ergonomically contrived network sysetems have selective advantage
    over those that are not, and thus crowd out those less selective
    neural networks. Somewhere in the midsts of this ontogenetic process
    we meet Thomas, the main charatceer of Blow Up, who suffers through
    a predicament beyond his control. It is a kind of disease of the
    late twentieth century that w might call 'artificially induced
    disparate memory syndrome,' in which organic and artificial memory
    systems compete for consiousness';s attention, leaving the subject
    distraught and disassociated. "[50] <#eID50>

    "...this exploration shows ... that images --whether mental or
    material, microtemporal or macrotemporal, proto-conscious or
    phenomenologically conscious --are irreducibly temporal entities or
    processes ... rather than their being --and indeed as the
    precondition for their becoming-- 'fixed mentral' or material,
    images are fundamentally temporal processes or ... temporallizations
    of 'light-matter'. "[24] <#eID24>

    "... Re-collector [james coupe] would appear to exploiit precisely
    that direct cntact with the sensory flux that Mraurizio Lazzarato,
    following Nam June Paik, discerns in video technology: "all images
    produced by electronic and difital technologies are tranformation
    and combinations (composites) of intensities, forces, fields, taking
    place in the flow -the electromagnetic flow in the case of vide,ethe
    optical flow in the case fo the telematic, the algorhythmnic flow in
    the case of the computer. The transition from the first to the last
    can be defined as an increasingly forced deterritorialization. ...
    The flow of information overgomces, again, matter, and light is just
    mathematic (non-discursive) language. "[24] <#eID24>

    "For Lazzarato, as fr DEleuze before him, video and digital
    technologies take the lace of the Bergsonist body as center of
    indetermination within a universe of images; what results is a
    massive deterritorialization of perception from its allefedly
    constraining correlation to human embodiment and habit. ...
    Operating as 'maachines to crystallize time,' vidfeo and digital
    technologies increase the delay between perception and reactionl in
    this way they extend our power to act beyond the well-worn
    contradictions known as habit. Yet the key question remains
    wheether, in so doing, the sever contact with embodied sensation.
    "[24] <#eID24>

    ""in a relationship only with an indirect image *of* rime (rependent
    on montage), the pure optical and suond image, its opsigns and
    sonsigns, are directly connected to a time-image, which has
    subordinated movement... movement is the perspective of time" (22).
    Rather than insisting tha the sonsisgn be liberated from the image,
    Deleuze suggests that the cinematic sonsign is juxtaposed or
    enfolded via irrational cuts with the pure optical sign that serves
    a corollary function of imaging intensity. A pure optical and sound
    image "makes us graps, it is supposed to make us graps, something
    intolerable and unbearable . .. It is a matter of something too
    powerful, or too unjust, but sometimes also too beautiful, and which
    henceforth outstrips our sensory-motor capacities: (19). So instead
    of needing to liberate sound from image in the intermedia
    environment, we could take the lead from Deleuze to dwqell on the
    folding of image into sound, as the aural horizon of intensity
    itself. Indeed, the irrational interstice, that is, the irrational
    cut between two images, the visual and the sonorous, actually
    reinforces what Deleuze calls "the victory of the audio-visual
    (253)":. Crucial to the irrational relation of the ttwo
    disssymetrical trajectories of the visual nand the sonorous,
    however, is Deleuze's insistence that 'the audio-visual image is not
    a whole, it is a 'fusion of the tear' (268). "[48] <#eID48>

    "As the carrier of 'intimate force' and 'intensity', the image, even
    when musical, choreographic, or cinematic, does not so much
    'represent' as 'activate' and 'intensify' representation and its
    'touch'. Iut is this 'immaterial'force that lends the image its
    'impalpable nature' and that constitutes that which it 'images'. To
    image sound, in this context, would necessitate activating the
    intransitive verb favored by Nancy, 'to image' nether 'to
    illostrate' nor 'to imagine' but 'faire l'image', to lend touch,
    intensity, and force to what is by definiton incorporeal, to what
    lies solely neither in material nor in its materialization (127-27).
    "[48] <#eID48>

    "... it has beceome a commonplace to insist that 'images' played a
    central role in twentieth-century culture and promise to play an
    even more powerful role in tewnty-first century life and thought.
    And if one also believes, as Kaja Silverman has insisted, that
    visuality is onur most significant and primary form of ethical
    engagement with the world, then the continueds refinement of
    image-producing technologies such as photography and cinema, and
    their dissemination through multiple arenas of life, ranging from
    leisure activities to war and surveillance technologies, seems to
    justify claims that modern socieety is obsessed with and inscribed
    by spectacles and images. "[46] <#eID46>

    "... Jarman's film reminds us that our current obsession with images
    is often implicitly understood in terms of an ocularcentrism that is
    purported to define selves, networks of forces, ethical
    relationships, and their media withinvisual economies that
    conceptually indenture 'life' to the image. "[46] <#eID46>

    "The recent rise to prominence of technologies of digitalization has
    offered possibilities of understanding the image beyond this premise
    of ocularcentrism, for digital images emphasize the extent to which
    the indexicalityu of photographic or cinematic images --the sense of
    an ontological link between a representation and the 'real' objects
    r actions that it represents --can be produced through manipulation
    of allgorithms. ... As a consequence, and despite its apparent
    ubiquity, 'the image' as a category of analysis remains remarkably
    resistant to theoretical understanding. "[46] <#eID46>

    "For Ranciere, 'image' stands for ever-shifting processes of
    inscription and articulation: the 'sayable and the visible' refer to
    connections between sight and writing that mutually inform one
    another. The production of the image implies not that all images are
    artificially made, but rather that our capacity for image-making and
    image -receivin are underwritten by a technicity that relationally
    unbind the phenomenolofgical and cognitive subject. "[46] <#eID46>

    "...the spectator realizes with surprise that what caught his
    attention is no just the animation of the images that he was used to
    considering immobile. It is, rather, a transformation that concerns
    the very nature of fthose images... And because the real paradigm of
    life in the modern era is not movement but time, this means that
    there is a life of images that it is our task to understand. As the
    author himself states [Bill Viola]... "the essence of the visual
    medium is time ... images live within us. At this moment we each
    have an extenssive visual world inside of us ... We are living
    databases of images -collectors of images- and these images do not
    stop transforming and growing once they get inside us" "[3] <#eID3>

    "The image that 'generates itself' seems to be a monstrosity, a
    non-thing [Unding], if one assummes that people produce images; that
    is, that images do not come into being absent an intentional act but
    are rather the results of conscious or unconsious intentions. "[21]
    <#eID21>


        Installation

    "Sound art installations that are set up for weeks at a time blur
    the boundary between the macro and the supratemporal timescales.
    Indeed, an algorithmic composition system can spawn non-repeating
    musical patterns indefinitely, given a sufficiently large parameter
    space to explore (Collins 2002). "[57] <#eID57>

    "In the 1950s, John Cage created a number of installations involving
    multiple sources of sound. In these sound art installations,
    spatialization is achieved by having each member of the audience
    navigate freely through the gallery; in effect, each visitor creates
    their own performance. For example, Cage’s Imaginary Landscape No. 4
    (1951) deploys 12 radio receivers. Williams Mix (1952), realized at
    the New York studios of Louis and Bebe Barron, featured eight
    monaural tapes, each playing through its own loudspeaker (Zvonar
    2005). Together with David Tudor, Cage realized Variations IV (1965)
    in which multiple tape machines played back from locations inside
    and outside a Los Angeles gallery. Other multiple-source
    installations included Cage’s HPSCHD (1969) and Tudor’s Rainforest
    (1973), which featured multiple sound transducers in settings in
    which the audience circulated freely. "[57] <#eID57>

    "The market for spatial sound systems continues to grow and a
    multitude of software applications and plug-ins are available. At
    the same time, spatial sound has invaded the world of electronic
    art; it is now common to find gallery installations and sculptures
    that deploy distributed loudspeakers. The physicality of spatial
    sound is often a theme in these works. "[57] <#eID57>


        Interaction

    "Interaction: "acting upon each other". Interaction might occur
    between people, between people and machines, between machines, or
    between artwork and audience. However, examples of humans and
    machines or humans and artworks truly acting upon each other are
    relatively rare. What is popularity termed interaction in there
    cases is often a more simple 'reaction' -a human presses keys or
    trigger sensors, and the machine or computer program reacts. ...
    What computer programs can offer are highly complex, branching,
    evolving reactions. This reactivity can significantly affect the
    audience experience in terms of choice, navigation, control,
    engagement, or .... time and space. ... What computer-based media
    cannot offer is the kind of truly symmetrical interaction between
    human and machine that would approximate a good conversation
    (verbal, visual or otherwise). No computer program has yet passed
    the Turing Test for artificial intelligence, where a human judge
    must decide whether his or her typed dialogue is with a human or a
    computer. "[22] <#eID22>


        Intermedia

    "Much of the best work being produced today seems to fall between
    media.... the concept of the separation between media arose in the
    Renaissance. The idea that a painting is made of paint on canvas or
    that a sculpture should not be painted seems characteristic of the
    kind of social thought --categorizing and dividing society into
    nobility with its various subdivisions, untitled gentry, artisans,
    serfs and landless workers --witch we call the feudal conception of
    the Great Chain of Being. This essentially mechanistic approach
    continued to be relevant throughout the first two industrial
    revolutions, just concluded, and into the present era of automation,
    which constitutes, in fact, a third industrial revolution. "[26]
    <#eID26>

    "Thus the happening developed as an intermedium, an uncharted land
    that lies between collage, music and theater. It is not governed by
    rules; each work determines its own medium and form according to its
    needs. "[26] <#eID26>


        Listening

    "To be listening is thus to enter into tension and to be on the
    lookout for a relation to self: /not/ it shoudl be emphasized, a
    relationship to "me" (the supposedly given subject), or to the
    "self" or the other (the speaker, the musician, also supposedly
    given, with his subjectivity), but to the /relationship in self/, so
    to speak, as it forms a "self" or a "to itself" in general, and if
    something like that ever does reach the end of its formation.
    consecuently, listening is passing over to the register of presence
    to self, it being understood that the "self" is precisely nothing
    available (substantial or subsistent) to which one can be "present,"
    but precisely the resonance of a return [/renvoi/] "[49] <#eID49>

    "the sonorous present is the result of space-time: it spreads
    through space, or rather it opens a space taht is its own, the very
    spreading out of its resonance, its expansion and its reverberation.
    This space is immediately omnidimensional and transversate through
    all spaces: the expansion of sound through obstacles, its property
    of penetration and ubiquity, has always been noted.... Sound has no
    hidden face; it is all in front, in back, and outside inside,
    /inside-out/ in relation to the most general logic of presence as
    appearing, as phenomenality or as manifestation, and thus as the
    visible face of a presence subsisting in self. Something of the
    theoretical and intentional scheme tuned to optics vacillates around
    it. To listen is to enter that spatiality by which, /at the same
    time/, I am penetrated, for it opens up in me as well as around me,
    and from me as well as toward me: it opens me inside me as well as
    outside, and it is through such a double, quadruple, or sextuple
    opening that a "self" can take place. To be listening is to be /at
    the same time/ outside and inside, to be open /from/ without and
    /from/ within, hence from one to the other and from one in the
    other. Listening thus forms the perceptible singularity that bears
    in the most ostensive way the perceptible or sensitive (/aisthetic/)
    condition as such: the wharing of an inside/outside, division and
    participation, de-connection and contagion. "Here, time becomes
    space," is sung in Wagner's /Parsifal/. "[49] <#eID49>

    "listening takes place /at the same time/ as the sonoros event, an
    arrangement that is clearly distinct from that of vision (for which,
    incidentally, there is no visual or luminous "event" either, in an
    entirely identical meaning of the word: visual presence is already
    there, available, before I see it, whereas sonorous presence
    /arrives/–it entails an /attack/, as musicians and acousticians
    say). And animal bodies, in general –the human body, in particular–
    are not gonstructed to interrupt at their leisure the sonorous
    arrival, as has often been noted. "The ears don't have eyelids" is
    an old theme that is often repeated. "[49] <#eID49>


        Multimedia

    "This book is about precisely this phenomenon of audiovisual
    illusion, an illusion located first and foremost in the heart of the
    most important of relations between sound and image, as illustrated
    above with Bergman: what we shall call added value. By added value I
    mean the expressive and informative value with which a sound
    enriches a given image so as to create the def- inite impression, in
    the immediate or remembered experience one has of it, that this
    information or expression 'naturally' comes from what is seen, and
    is already contained in the image itself "[13] <#eID13>

    "IN an artwork as ''open system', exchange leads to agency, a place
    where negtiation takes place as a form of shared authorship and
    social exchange. IN their essay, Kristine Stiles and Edward Shanken
    maintain that agency is implicitly the primary goal and meaning of
    interacitve multimedia art. I f one of the functions of multimedia
    is agency, then meaning is derived from the queaities that agency
    obtains in interaction. As the authors put it, 'agency involves the
    freedom to create, change, and influence institutions and events, or
    to act as a proxy on behalf of someone else'. Agency, therefore is
    the importance of each individual voice as part of meaningful social
    interaction. "[35] <#eID35>

    "What is said about 'digital' also applies to the notion of
    'multimediality', which is usually taken to refer to the 'seamless
    integration of data, text, sound, and images of all kinds with a
    single, digital information environtment'. The use of the term
    'multimedia' has indeed, as this definition suggests, been
    restricted to refer to digital, computer-based environment. However,
    as Manovich again rightly points out, multimediality is not a
    feature unique to new media. Cinema, television and the theatre
    already combine images, texts, sounds and often slide projections,
    rear projections and other sorts of special effects obtained by the
    inclusion of one or more 'other'media. The 'multimediality' o fthe
    theatre in fact inspired Einsteint's concept of 'montage of
    attractions'. .... Multimedia , then, actually mmeans that a single
    information environment offers the user simultaneous access to
    different sorts of media. The novelty of new media, therefore,
    primaritly consists of the computer's capacity to give access t
    different types of media at the same time, and this basically boils
    down to a capacity to present 'old media' in new ways and to suggest
    new uses for these old media. Multimediality in itself is, however,
    neither unique nor new, and the novelty of new media mainly and most
    importantly consists of a repositioning and redefinition of old
    media: what Jay David Bolter and Richard Grusin call 'remediation'.
    "[61] <#eID61>


        New Media Theory

    "To conceptualize this particular stage of our technogenesis -and
    the particular technical expansion of prepersonal bodily function
    that digital technologies facilitate- we will need to draw
    erxtensively on philosophical and psychological exploration of the
    'body schema' and the skin as a generalized sense organ. We will
    also need to develop a fundamentally or 'essentially' technical
    phenomenology of the body, one that takes as its primary task the
    elucidation of the originary technical basis of embodied experience
    (part 1)... The discussion begins with twho crucial and interrelated
    concepts of Merleau-Ponty's /Phenomenology of perception/ -namely,
    the absolute priority of the phenomenal body (largely akin to the
    operational perspective of the organism) and the primary role
    accorded bodily motility (i.e., the body schema) in the constitution
    of a systemic coupling between organisma and environment. The
    argument ultimately aims to conceptualize a technics on the basis of
    (and adequate to) the chiasmic correlation of being and world that
    forms the heart of Merleau-Ponty's final unfinished project, as
    documented particularly in /The Visible and the Invisible/ and
    /Nature/. In contrast to the clearly delineated (and still
    subordinate or secondary) dimension of technics associated with
    Merleau-Ponty's exploration of motor intentionality in the
    /Phenomenology/ (a dimension famously telescoped in the example fo
    the blindman's stick), such a technics must be capable of supporting
    -of /being/- the /medium/ of human individual and collective
    individuation. "[25] <#eID25>

    "once referred to as 'computer art', then multimedia art and
    cyberarts (from the 1960s-90s), digital art now is often used
    interchangeably with 'new media art'. .... what exactly is 'new'
    about the digital medium? Some of the convepts exlored in digital
    art date back almost a century, adn many others have been previously
    addressed in various 'traditional' arts. What is in factnew ist that
    digital technology has now reached such a stage of development that
    it offers entirely new possibbilities for the creation and
    experience of art. "[53] <#eID53>

    "The term 'new media' came into prominence in the mid-1990s,
    usurping the place of 'multimedia'" in the fields of business and
    art. Unlike its predecessor, the term 'new media' was not
    accommodating: it portrayed other media as old or dead; it converged
    rather than multiplied; it did not efface itself in favor of a happy
    if redundant plurality. The singular plurality of the phrase ("new
    media" is a plural noun treated as a singular subject) stemmed from
    its negative definition: it was not mass media, specifically
    television. It was fluid, individualized connectivity, a medium to
    distribute control and freedom. Alghough new media deende d heavily
    on computerization, new media was not simply "digital media": that
    i, i was not digitized forms of other media (photography, video,
    text), but rather an interactive medium or form of distribution as
    independent as the information it relayed. "[31] <#eID31>

    "Each of the words in the term new media art can be hotly contested.
    To start with art, we do not attempt to define it; rather, we point
    out that the histories in this book relate not only to art, but also
    to everyday culture, sociology, politics, commerce, design, science,
    and technology. As described in this book, new media technologys are
    used for commerce, education, and social communication as well as
    for art, and the distinctions between the uses of media in these
    fields is often blurred. The term new media without art usually
    refers to commercial broadcast forms such as interactive television;
    some people in fine art thus classify all new media as outside the
    bounds of art and instead as forms of broadcast. If net media art is
    classified not as art, but as technology or science, then there are
    more subcategories to be explored, such as software or data
    visualization. "[22] <#eID22>

    "In particular, we believe that histories of technology need to be
    understood alongside histories of art if there is to be a bridge
    between the lands. .. The artworks currently or former known as 'new
    media art' have amassed around them a varied nomenclature, including
    art & technology, art/sci, computer art, electronic art, digital
    art, digital media, intermedia, multimedia, tactical media, emerging
    media, upstart media, variable media, locative media, immersive art,
    interactive art, and Things That You Plug In. "[22] <#eID22>

    "All new media objects, whether created from scratch on computers or
    converted from analog media sources, are composed of digital code;
    they are numerical representations.... 1. A new media object can be
    described formally (mathematically).... 2. A new media object is
    subject to algorithmic manipulation. "[41] <#eID41>


        Open-Source

Oliver assesses the consequences of composing using media or
technologies developed by other people than besides the composer.

    "La figura del compositor como parte del modelo, vertical y
    unidireccional, compositor -> partitura -> interprete -> instrumento
    -> audiencia pertenece a las prácticas, principalmente europeas, de
    música preelectricidad. En esta tradición musical, la teoría de la
    música y los instrumentos usados son vistos como límites a la mente
    creativa. Con la llegada de los medios electrónicos, encarnada
    inicialmente por Leon Théremin y luego por las corrientes de música
    concreta en Francia y electrónica en Alemania, músicos y
    compositores diversos interpretan los cambios que se dan en los
    medios de producción y transmisión de música como una liberación de
    los límites físicos de los materiales con que se fabrican los
    instrumentos, así como de las habilidades corporales de los
    ejecutantes humanos. Los cambios que introducen estos medios... no
    son cosméticos sino que transforman la forma en la que componemos a
    tal punto que el diseño de los medios o tecnologías que utilizamos
    para componer o para los que componemos determina nuestras
    composiciones. "[51] <#eID51>

    "Curator Caitlin Jones acknowledges that the systems used by new
    media fundamentally challenge art institutions in some of the same
    ways that socially engaged practice does --via understandings of
    open or closed systems and authorship. "[22] <#eID22>

    "Open source is a specific term for collaborative production of
    software, where the source code of how the system work is available
    for modification by any programmer. However, the collaboration may
    not be egalitarian; hierarchies of skill and time most certainly
    apply and are acknowledged by those inside the system. "[22] <#eID22>


        Software

    "in composing music, we are composing time, that is, we are
    articulating it into a variety of temporalities. I believe that this
    affirmation acquires a very concrete meaning through the use of the
    computer, which constitutes a tool for shaping time at all possible
    levels. "[65] <#eID65>

    "The computer employed for MUSIC I was an IBM 704, the immediate
    successor to IBM's very first computer, the 701. In common with all
    first‐generation computers of the time it was based on slow and
    often unreliable valve technology. The introduction of
    transistor‐based circuits in the late 1950s held the vital key to
    more efficient computer architectures, and by the end of the decade
    an entirely new family of machines entered production. Bell
    Telephone Laboratories took delivery of one of these
    second‐generation computers, an IBM 7094, just in time for Mathews
    to adapt and complete his work on MUSIC II. Assisted by Joan Miller,
    (p.188) he then embarked on a much‐expanded version of this program
    offering a variety of synthesis and signal processing functions,
    MUSIC III, completed early in 1960. "[37] <#eID37>

    "When we raise this question of whether it is possible to compose
    music with a computer, we may note the following points: (1) Music
    is a sensible form. It is governerd by laws of organization which
    permit fairly exact codification (As we shall later note, it has
    even been claimed that the content of music is nothign but its
    organization.) From this proposition, it follows that
    computer-produced music which is "meaningful" is conceivable to the
    extent to which the laws of musical organization are codifiable. (2)
    It is a feature of digital computers that they can be efficiently
    used to "create a random universe" and to select ordered sets of
    information from this random universe in accordance with imposed
    rules, musical or otherwise. (3) Since the process of creative
    composition can be similarly viewed as an imposition of order upon
    an infinite ariety of possibilities, an analogy between the tweo
    processes seems to hold, and the opportunity us affirded for a
    fairly close approximation of the composing process utilizing a
    high-speed electronic digital computer. In this context, it should
    be noted, however, that the composer is traditionally thought of as
    guided in his choices not only by certain technical rules but also
    by his "aural sensibility," while the computer would be dependent
    entirely upon a rationalization and codification of this "aural
    sensibility." It is desirable to consider briefly how automatic
    high-speed digital computers operate. These instruments function in
    principle much as do ordinary desk calculators, but with certain
    significant differences. Perhaps the most important difference is
    that a whole set of computing instructions, called a /code/ or
    /computing program/, which is entirely expressed in terms of
    mathematical operations, and which is prepared from a library of
    instructions called an /order code/, is placed into a computer prior
    to the actual process of computation. This eliminates delays
    resulting from the slowness of the human opertor in handling numbers
    being produced during the period of actual computation. A second
    important differenc is that automatic digital computers have what is
    called a /conditional transfer/ process... it si operations of this
    tye used repeatedly and sequentially, perhaps more than any other,
    that permit programs to be written for the computer expressing
    logical processes of musical composition.... extremely high speed
    and the ability to react differently to positive and negative
    numbers, permit the practical exploitation of the so-called "Monte
    Carlo method" for solving certain types of complex mathematical
    problems. "[27] <#eID27>

    "The instructions which govern this operation must be given to the
    device in absolutely exhaustive detail. They include all numerical
    information which is required to solve the problem under
    consideration: Initial and boundary values of the dependent
    variables, values of fixed parameters (constants), tables of fixed
    functions which occur in the statement of the problem. These
    instructions must be given in some form which the device can sense:
    Punched into a system of punchcards or on teletype tape,
    magnetically impressed on steel tape or wire, photographically
    impressed on motion picture film, wired into one or more fixed or
    exchangeable plugboards—this list being by no means necessarily
    complete. All these procedures require the use of some code to
    express the logical and the algebraical definition of the problem
    under consideration, as well as the necessary numerical material
    (cf. above). Once these instructions are given to the device, it
    must be able to carry them out completely and without any need for
    further intelligent human intervention. At the end of the required
    operations the device must record the results again in one of the
    forms referred to above. The results are numerical data; they are a
    specified part of the numerical material produced by the device in
    the process of carrying out the instructions referred to above.
    "[70] <#eID70>

    " We may compare a man in the process of computing a real number to
    ;i machine which is only capable of a finite number of conditions
    q1: q2. .... qI; which will be called " m-configurations ". The
    machine is supplied with a " t a p e " (the analogue of paper)
    running through it, and divided into sections (called "squares")
    each capable of bearing a "symbol". At any moment there is just one
    square, say the r-th, bearing the symbol <2>(r) which is "in the
    machine". We may call this square the "scanned square ". The symbol
    on the scanned square may be called the " scanned symbol". The
    "scanned symbol" is the only one of which the machine is, so to
    speak, "directly aware". However, by altering its m-configu- ration
    the machine can effectively remember some of the symbols which it
    has "seen" (scanned) previously. The possible behaviour of the
    machine at any moment is determined by the ra-configuration qn and
    the scanned symbol [64]

    "Inasmuch as the completed device will be a general-purpose
    computing machine it should contain certain main organs relating to
    arithmetic, memory- storage, control and connection with the human
    operator. It is intended that the machine be fully automatic in
    character, i.e. independent of the human operator after the
    computation starts. "[11] <#eID11>

    "The synthesis of music by a computer was born in 1957 when an
    IBM704 in New York City slowly computed a 17-second ‘piece’ composed
    in what was probably the first audible example of a new musical
    scale with my program, Music 1. "[43] <#eID43>

a detailed account of the construction of the ORDVAC and the ILLAC 1
computer, particularly of John von Neumann’s agency in the construction
of the latter by the University of Illinois

    "As the project began to fall behind schedule, John Von Neumann of
    the Institute for Advanced Study (IAS) at Princeton University
    suggested that the University of Illinois construct its own computer
    (from: Computing/An Illinois Outline, Urbana: Department of Computer
    Science)... Illinois obtained permission from the director of IAS,
    J. Robert Oppenheimer, to construct a computer based on the one
    being built at the Institute "[9] <#eID9>

    "Or what about the most basic media types: text, images, video,
    sound, maps? Obviously, these media types have different
    representational and expressive capabilities; they can produce
    different emotional effects; they are processed by different
    networks of neurons; and hey also likely correspond to different
    types of mental processes and mental representations. These
    differences have been discussed for thousand of years --from ancient
    philosophy to classical aesthetic theory to modern art theory and
    contemporary neuroscience. For example, sound, video, and animation
    can represent temporal processes; language can be used to specify
    logical relations; and so on. Software did not change much here.
    What it did fundamentally change, however, is how concrete instances
    of such media types (and their various combinations) function in
    practice. The result is that any such instance lost much of its
    unique identity. What as users we experience as particular
    properties of a piece of media come from software used to create,
    edit, present, and access this content. "[42] <#eID42>

    "If you want to escape our prison of software --or at least better
    understand what media is today --stop downloading apps created by
    others. Instead, learn to program --and teach it to your students.
    "[42] <#eID42>

    "the IBM 701 was, according to IAS engineer Julian Bigelow: “a
    carbon copy of our machine even down to and including the Williams
    memory tubes”. According to Dyson, however, Bell Labs by 1951 had
    become “‘sufficiently interested,’ as Oppenheimer puts it, ‘to want
    to give the Institute [IAS] $20,000 a year for a period of five
    years with no strings attached.’” "[18] <#eID18>


        Sonification

    "Sonification is defined as the use of nonspeech audio to convey
    information. More specifically, sonification is the transformation
    of data relations into perceived relations in an acoustic signal for
    the purposes of facilitating communication or interpretation (Kramer
    et al. 1999). "[6] <#eID6>

    "• Sinification. The oldest and simplest technique. Increases in
    numerical data are mapped to increases in the frequency of a
    sine-tone. Listeners are able to make relative judgements of
    more-or-less about the magnitude of a single variable. •
    MIDIfication. This common technique is simple to produce, portable
    and provides an equal pitch scale. The MIDI protocol has a musical
    metaphor of an orchestra with 127 instruments that play 127 notes at
    127 levels of loudness. Categorical changes in the data can be
    represented by categorical changes in instrument timbre. •
    Musicification. Scales and chords, tempo and key changes produce a
    musical experience. Music has narrative qualities that can convey
    the narrative phases of a rowing race, for example, the change in
    arousal and mood from the start, to the middle, to the end. The
    affective musical dimensions of valence and arousal could provide a
    basis for affective sonifications. • Vocalization. Vocal synthesis
    produces both categori- cal and continuous variations that can
    represent quan- titative and qualitative data relations. Categorical
    differences in vowel sounds can distinguish forward from backward
    acceleration. • Iconification. Physically inspired acoustic models
    are selected by metaphorical connotations to the domain of rowing,
    such as water splashes, wood and metal impacts. Derived information
    included turning points, zero crossings, thresholds, and rates of
    change are used to trigger impacts on the simulated models. •
    Stream-based. Granular synthesis techniques produce a perceptual
    figure/ground that groups features from positive acceleration and
    segregates them from features of negative acceleration. "[6] <#eID6>


        Sound

    "The phenomenon of added value is especially at work in the case of
    sound/image synchronism, via the principle of /synchresis/ (see
    chapter 3), the forging of an immediate and necessary rela- tionship
    between something one sees and something one hears. Most falls,
    blows, and explosions on the screen, simulated to some extent or
    created from the impact of nonresistant materials, only take on
    consistency and materiality through sound. But first, at the most
    basic level, added value is that of text, or language, on image.
    "[13] <#eID13>

    "It is also a function of meaning, and is organized according to
    gestaltist laws and contextual determinations. Play a stream of
    random audio and visual events, and you will find that certain ones
    will come together through synchresis and other combinations will
    not. "[13] <#eID13>

    "Time images that activate modernist cinema are differentiated from
    movement images which, by their disconnection of time from space,
    are the hallmark of classic cinema. Time becomes independent of
    space because th temporal continuity of the reaction time of the
    body as it responds to a stimulus in the sensory-motor schema is
    broken. When time and space are split off from the normal linkages
    that connect events, time and space are reconfigured under the
    abstract notion of 'any-space-whatever'. Sonsigns and opsigns are
    the neologistic inventions Deleuze creates to delineate these
    differences. Both are the result of the creation of a meta-cinema
    and meta-language with wchich to read and understand it. Sonsigns
    are pure aural sensations untethered to the physical body, as are
    opsigns, their visual counterpart. Images freed from the body can
    dance and wander, no longer adhering to tonal rhythms: "Specular
    moments give way to the most banal ones without a sense of rational
    logic... In the end the cinema trips into an ambiguity so
    overwhelming that the imaginary and real become indiscernible."
    (Flaxman, 2000,p32) "[50] <#eID50>

    "Sound tracks have become integral to most of such new media works
    and introduce a new flux and momentum to them as a vibratory,
    immaterial, shimmering element that may integrate many different
    connected elements within contemporary installation projects. "[35]
    <#eID35>

    "Nancy takes this linkage of electric sound to temporality one step
    further by locating 'sonorous time' as the very immaterial stuff of
    expansion and resounding as 'a present in waves on a swell, not a
    point on a line'. "[48] <#eID48>

    "Put similarly by Jean-Luc Nancy, who philosophizes on the shared
    space of sound and meaning, the latter, meaning. "is made of a
    totality of referrals: froom a singn to a thing, from a state of
    things to a quality, from a subject to another subject or to itself,
    all simultaneously. Sound is also made of referrals: it spereads in
    space, where it resounds while still resounding 'in me'". ... "[48]
    <#eID48>

    "Scaletti [81] provided a “working definition of sonification” as “a
    mapping of numerically represented relations in some domain under
    study to relations in an acoustic domain for the purpose of
    interpreting, understanding, or communicating relations in the
    domain under study” [p. 224]. She classified sonification mappings
    by level of directness: level 0) audification, level 1) parameter
    mapping, and level 2) a mapping from one parameter to one or more
    other parameters. "[5] <#eID5>

    "The intention to produce a musical expe- rience does not
    necessarily include the intention to reveal explicit information
    about the sources of composition. However, when the composer does
    intend the listener to understand extra-musical information, the
    work then enters the realm of sonification. "[6] <#eID6>

    "We have actually three dimensions in music: horizontal, verticaal,
    and dynamic swelling or decreasing, I shall add a fourth, sound
    projection --that feeling that sound is leaving us with no hope of
    being reflected back, a feeling akin to that aroused by beams of
    light sent forth by a powerful searchlight --foir the ear as for the
    eye, that sense of projection, of a journey into space. "[67] <#eID67>

A sound metaphor to exemplify a morphological turn.

    "Just beore an airplane breaks the sound barrier, sound wasves
    become visible on the wings of the plane. The sudden visibility of
    sound just as sound ends is an apt instance of that great pattern of
    being that reveals new and opposite forms just as the earlier forms
    reach their peak performance... When electric speed further takes
    over from mechanical movie sequences, then the lines of force in
    structures and in media become loud and clear. We return to the
    inclusive form of the icon. "[44] <#eID44>

    "The telegraph translated writing into sound, a fact directly
    related to the origin of both the telephone and phonograph. With
    tthe telegraph, the only walls left are the vernacular walls that
    the photograph and movie and wirephoto overleap so easily. The
    electrification of writing was almost as big a step into the
    nonvisual and auditory space as the later steps soon taken by
    telephone, radio, and TV. The telephone: speech without walls. The
    phonograph: music without walls. The photograph: museum without
    walls. The electric light: space without walls. The movie, radio,
    and TV: classroom without walls. Man the food-gatherer reappears
    incongruously as information-gatherer. In this role, electronic man
    is no less a nomad than his paleolithic ancestors. "[44] <#eID44>


        Stochastics

    "The role of the computer in the shaping of musical time-which must
    be viewed as being the matter of computer-aided composition-needs to
    be further worked out, from the temporal behaviour of the partials
    of a spectrum, to the multiple temporalities involved in a complex
    sound-object, to the macro-time of the (causal and/or emergent,
    lineal and/or non-lineal) global form, without forgetting all the
    fractional dimensions in between, nor the structural relationships
    established at each level by interaction with all other levels.
    "[65] <#eID65>

    "In any case --to play with sounds like dice-- what a truly
    simplistic activity! But once one has emerged from this primary
    field of chance worthless to a musician, the calculation of the
    aleatory, that is to say stochastics, guarantees first that in a
    region of precise definition slips will not be made, and then
    furnishes a powerful method of reasoning and enrichment of sonic
    processes. "[73] <#eID73>


        Tensegrity

    "R. Buckminster Fuller coined the word ‘tensegrity’ by combining
    tension and integrity to describe a structural system that is
    composed of a triangulated tension and compression network. [Donal
    Ingber] identifies tensegrity as a universal set of building rules
    that seem to guide the design of organic structures -- from simple
    carbon compounds to complex cells and tissues. "[68] <#eID68>


        Visual Art

    "Visual art remains a materially based process, functioning on the
    level of /affect/, not purely semiotics – i.e., a synaesthetic
    relation is established between work and viewer, which is in /excess
    of visuality/. It involves rather enigmatic sensations such as the
    vibrations of rhythm and spatiality, a sense of scale and volume, of
    touch and smell, of lightness, stillness, silence or noise, all of
    which resonate with the body and its reminiscences and operate on
    the level of "sense" not "meaning."... "[20] <#eID20>


        Work

    "As we have seen, new ,edia art isn't necessarily always immaterial,
    alghtouhg elements of its computability and connectivity can be
    invisible to the eye. Similiarly, conceptual and systems of art of
    the 1960s and 1970s posited that the idea was more important than
    the form, making the medium of the work often immaterial. One of the
    links among conceptual art practices of the 1960s, networked and
    systems-based art practices of the 1970s, telecommunications works
    of the early 1980s, and Internet-based art of the 1990s is the
    approach to the question of the dissolution of the autonomy of the
    art object (Lippard 1973). This approach has then, by extension, had
    to address a critique of the institutions that present art and that
    thus precondition its autonomy. The striving toward autonomy is,
    some argue, ever more prevalent, perhaps even a prerequisite, for
    works of new media, which exist in a technological context shared by
    other media and entertainment that have educational and other
    commecial objectives. "[22] <#eID22>

    "For new media, the political, social and commercial structures of
    'work' are often based on systems that differ from old
    understandings. At the time of the Industrial Revolution, the
    cooperative movement stood as a clear alternative to capitalism and
    to the company store. For socially engaged art, collaborative
    practices are clearly challenging individual authorship, the art
    museum, and art audiences. "[22] <#eID22>


        Aesthetics

    "Knowledge, which is power, knows no obstacles: neither in the
    enslavement of men nor in compliance with the world's rulers. As
    with all the ends of bourgois economy in the factory and on the
    battlefield, origin is no bar to the dictates of the entrepeneurs:
    kings, no less directly than businessmen, control technology; it is
    as democratic as the economic system with which it is bound up.
    Technology is the essence of this knoledge. It does not work by
    concepts and images, by the fortunate insight, but refers to method,
    the exploitation of others' work, and capital. "[28] <#eID28>

    "What men want to learn from nature is how to use it in order wholly
    to dominate it and other men. That is the only aim. Ruthlessly, in
    despite of itself, the Enlightenment has extinguished any trace of
    its own self-consciousness. "[28] <#eID28>

    "For Bacon as for Luther, "knowledge that tendeth but to
    satisfaction, is but as a courtesan, which is for pleasure, and not
    for fruit or generation." Not "satisfaction, which men call truth,"
    but "operation," "to do the business," is the "right mark"... There
    is to be no mystery –which means, too, no wish to reveal mystery.
    The disenchantment of the world is the extirpation of animism....
    The world becomes chaos, and synthesis salvation. There is said to
    be no difference between the totemic animal, the dreams of a
    ghost-seer, and the absolute Idea. On the road to modern science,
    men renounce any claim to meaning.They substitute formula for
    concept, rule and probability for cause and motive. "[28] <#eID28>

    "For the Enlightenment, whatever does not conform to the rule of
    computation and utility is suspect. So long as it can develop
    undisturbed by any outward repression, there is no holding it. In
    the process, it treats its own ideas of human rights exactly as it
    does the older universals. Every spiritual resistance it encounters
    serves merely to increase its strength (Hegel). "[28] <#eID28>

    "In advance, the Enlightenment recognizes as being and occurrence
    only what can be apprehended in unity: its ideal is the system from
    which all and everything follows.... the structure of scientific
    unity has always been the same... The multiplicity of forms is
    reduced to position and arrangement, history to fact, things to
    matter.... Formal logic was the major school of unified science. It
    provided Enlightenment thinkers with the schema of the calculability
    of the world. The mythologizing equation of Ideas with numbers in
    Plato's last writings expresses the longing of all
    demythologization: number became the canon of the Enlightenment. The
    same equations dominate bourgeois justice and commodity exchange...
    Bourgeois society is ruled by equivalence. It makes the dissimilar
    comparable by reducing it to abstract quantities. To the
    Enlightenment, that which does not reduce to numbers, and ultimately
    to the one, becomes illusion; modern positivism writes it off as
    literature. "[28] <#eID28>


        Archive

Physico-historico-ontological principle, and nomological principle

    "/Arkhę/, we recall, names at once the /commencement/ and the
    /commandment/. This name apparently coordinates two principles in
    one: the principle according to nature or history, /there/ where
    things /commence/ –physical, historical, or ontological principle–
    but also the principle according to the law, /there/ where men and
    gods /command/, /there/ where authority, social order are exercised,
    /in this place/ from which /order/ is given –nomological principle.
    "[1] <#eID1>

    "The concept of the archive /shelters/ itself from this memory which
    it shelters... it forgets it... /arkhē/ in the /physical,
    historical, or ontological/ sense... of the commencement... and
    /even earlier/, "archive" refers to the /arkhē/ in the /nomological/
    sense... of the commandment... the meaning of "archive," its only
    meaning, comes to it from the Greek /arkheion/: initially a house, a
    domicile, an address, the residence of the superior magistrates, the
    /archons/, those who commanded... On account of their publicly
    recognized authority, it is at their home, in that /place/ which is
    their house ... that official documents are filed.... They have the
    power to interpret the archives.... this house arrest ... marks the
    institutional passage from the private to the public... the passage
    from one institution to another... privileged /topology/ [documents]
    inhabit this unusual place, this place of election where law and
    singularity intersect in /privilege/. At the intersection of the
    topological and the nomological. [This] /topo-nomology/ [or]
    archontic dimension of domiciliation [, or] patriarchic function ...
    must be paired with what we will call the power of /consignation/[:]
    asigning residence [and] the act of /con/signing through /gathering
    together signs/. "[1] <#eID1>

    "[any attempt to] rethink the place and the law according to which
    the archontic becomes instituted [this archontic principle, its
    authority] can only have grave consequences for a theory of the
    archive, as well as for its institutional implementation. A science
    of the archive must include the theory of this institutionalization,
    that is to say, at once the law which begins by inscribing itself
    there and of the right which authorizes it. This right imposes or
    supposes a bundle of limits which have a history, a deconstructable
    history... This deconstruction in progress concerns, as always, the
    institution of limits declared to be insurmountable [family, state
    law, secret/nonsecret, private/public, access rights, reproduction]
    [Footnote: Of course, the question of a politics of the archive is
    our permanent orientation here [a question that] runs through the
    whole of the field and in truth determines politics from top to
    bottom as /res publica/. There is no political power without control
    of the archive, if not of memory. Effective democratization can
    always be measured by this essential criterion: the participation in
    and the access to the archive, its constitution, and its
    interpretation. [Sonia Combe's Fordbidden Archives] about the
    'repressed archive' as 'power ... of the state over the
    historian'... consonant, in a way, with the low tone of our
    hypothesis, even if this fundamental note, the patriarchive, never
    covers all the others. "[1] <#eID1>

Mal d'Archive

    "/There is no archive without a place of consignation, without a
    technique of repetition, and without a certain exteriority. No
    archive without outside/... without consignation in an /external
    place/ which assures the possibility of memorization, of repetition,
    of reproduction, or of reimpression... we must also remember that
    repetition itself, the logic of repetition, indeed the repetition
    compulsion, remains, according to Freud, indissociable from the
    death drive. And thus from destruction. Consequence: right on what
    permits and conditions archivization, we will [find] what exposes to
    destruction, in truth what menaces with destruction introducing, /a
    priori/, forgetfulness... The archive always works, and /a priori/,
    against itself... The death drive is not a principle. It even
    threatens every principality, every archontic primacy, every
    archival desire. It is what we will call, later on, /le mal
    d'archive, archive fever/. "[1] <#eID1>

...destruction drive, to contradict even the conservation drive, what we
could call here the /archive drive/....

    "[the Mystic Pad] still participates in Cartesian space and
    mechanics: /natural/ waxm exteriority of the /memory aid/.... Far
    from the machine being a pure absence of spontaneity, its
    /resemblance/ to the physical apparatus, its existence and its
    necessity bear witness to the finitude of the mnemic spontaneity
    which is thus supplemented. The machine –and, consequently,
    representation– is death and finitude /within/ the psyche [Writing
    and Difference 227-28; L'ecriture 336-37] What is at issue here is
    nothing less than the /future/.... [two orders of questions, FIRST]:
    the /theoretical exposition/ of psychoanalisis [concerning] its
    /object/, and in particular all that is invested in the
    representational models of the psychic apparatus as an apparatus for
    ... our names for as many places of reading and interpretation [the
    field of these questions is not properly a field]... It is at least
    possible to ask whether... the structure of the psychic apparatus...
    resists the evolution of archival techno-science or not. Is the
    psychic apparatus /better represented/ or is it /affected
    differently/ by all the technical mechanisms for archivization and
    for reproduction, for prostheses of so-called live memory...?
    [SECOND] the archivization of psychoanalysis itself, of its 'life'
    ['acts'], of its private and public procedures... the content of
    what is to be archived /and/ the archive itself... In what way has
    the whole of this field been determined by a state of the technology
    of communication and of archivization?... [E-mail] would have
    transformed this history [of psychoanalysis] from top to bottom and
    in the most initial inside of its production, in its very
    /events/... The technical structure of the /archiving/ archive also
    determines the structure of the /archivable/ content even in its
    very comming into existence and in its relationship to the future.
    The archivization produces as much as it records the event. [This is
    also our political experience of the so-called news media].
    Everything remains on its scale. But the example of E-mail is
    priviledged in my opinion for a more important and obvious reason:
    because electronic mail today, and even more than fax, is on the way
    to transforming the entire public and private space of humanity, and
    first of all the limit between the private, the secrete (private or
    public), and the public or the phenomenal.... Archival technology
    ... determines ... the very institution of the archivable event. It
    conditions not only the form or the structure which prints, but the
    printed content of the printing: the /preassure/ of the /printinc/,
    the /impression/, before the division between the printed and the
    printer. This archival technique has commanded that which even in
    the past instituted and constituted whatever there was as
    anticipation of the future.... a token of the future... what is no
    longer archived in the same way is no longer lived in the same
    way.... Necessity, inside the /psyche/ itself, of a certain outside,
    of certain borders between insides and outsides. And with this
    /domestic outside/... the institution, in sum, of a /prosthesis of
    the inside/. *We have said "institution" (one could say "erection")
    so as to mark, right from the originary threshold of this
    prosthesis, a rupture which is just as originary with nature.* "[1]
    <#eID1>

    "there could be no archiving without titles (thus without names and
    without the archontic principle of legitimization, without laws,
    without criteria of classification and of hierarchization, without
    order and without order, in the double sense of the word) "[1] <#eID1>

Spectral Position

    "A phantom speaks... without responding it desposes of a response...
    a spectral response is always (thus informed by a /technē/ and
    inscribed in an archive) is always possible. There would be neither
    history nor tradition nor culture without that possibility. "[1] <#eID1>

    "The unconsious does not know the difference here between the
    virtual and the actual, the intention and the action (a certain
    Judaism also, by the way)... the intention... the acting out also,
    this left an archive... the unconscious would have been able to keep
    the archive... of its suspension or of its repression... an /archive
    of the virtual/... What will become of this when we will indeed have
    to remove the convept of virtuality from the couple which opposes it
    to actuality, to effectivity, or to reality?... The moment has come
    to accept a great stirring in our conceptual archive, and in it to
    cross a "logic of the unconsious" with a way of thinking of the
    virtual which is no longer limited by the traditional philosophical
    opposition between act and power. "[1] <#eID1>

the fatal and /formal/ constraint of a performative effect

    "Because the scene effectively repeats... such a repetition attests
    that "historical truth" which no breach of "material truth" will
    ever weaken. What confirms or demostrates a certain truth... is
    rather the scene of reading it provokes and in which the reader is
    inscribed in advance. ...the interpretation of the archive... can
    only illuminate, read, interpret, establish its object... by
    inscribing itself in it... by opening it and by enriching it enough
    to have a rightful place in it. There is no meta-archive. ... The
    archivist produces more archive, and that is why the archive is
    never closed. It opens out of the future. "[1] <#eID1>

The three doors of the future to come

    ""It is time for the historian to step asside to let the images
    speak" [Brenner and Yerushalmi] ... it is the sign of a respect
    before the future to come of the future to come. Thus he is no
    longer a historian. Good sense tells us ther is no history or
    archive of the future to come. A historian as such never looks to
    the future, which in the end does not concern him... is there a
    historian of the promise, a historian of the first door? "[1] <#eID1>

The second door: the /messianic/

    ""if it is at all knowable". This ephochal suspense... energy of
    virtuality [energeia of a dynamis] a coming or an event which one
    /allows/ or /incites/ to come ... in an experience which is
    heterogeneous to all taking note, as to any horizon of waiting as
    such: that is to say, to all stabilizable theorems as such. "[1] <#eID1>

the third door

    "the injunction of memory falls to Israel, and to Israel alone...
    the absolute privilege, the absolute uniqueness in the experience of
    the promise (the future) and the injunction of memory (the past)...
    I would have liked to spend hours, in truth an eternity, meditating
    while trembling before this sentence: /Only in Israel and nowhere
    else is the injunction to remember felt as a religious imperative to
    an entire people/. How can one not tremble before this sentence? ...
    Israel /both/ the future /and/ the past /as such/, /both/ hope...
    /and/ the duty of memory... Israel /alone/, Israel as a /people/ and
    Israel in its /totality/... The question of exemplarity... situates
    here the place of all the violences... those which say the One, the
    difference of the One in the form of uniqueness... and the One in
    the figure of totalizing assemblage... The gathering into itself of
    the One is never without violence, nor is the self-affirmation of
    the Unique, the law of the archontic, the law of /consignation/
    which orders the archive... As soon as there is the One, there is
    murder, wounding, traumatism. /L'Un se garde de l'autre/... the One
    forgets to remember itself to itself, it keeps and erases the
    archive of this injustice that it is. Of this violence that it does.
    /L'Un se fait violence/... /L'Un se garde de l'autre pour se faire
    violence/... The One, as self-repetition, can only repeat and recall
    this instituting violence. It can only affirm itself and engage
    itself in this repetition. This is even what ties in depth the
    injunction of memory with the anticipation of the future to come...
    first of all self-repetition [/yes, yes/] the death drive...
    /superrepression/ (suppression and repression), the anarchive... the
    possibility of putting to death the very thing, whatever its name,
    which /carries the law in its tradition/: the archon of the
    archive... the subjectile, the substrate, and the subject of the
    law... The one is alas, or happily, the condition of the other. And
    the Other is the condition for the One. ... There would be no future
    without repetition. And thus, as Freud perhaps would say (this would
    be his thesis), there is no future without the specter of the
    oedipal violence which inscribes the superrepression in the
    archontic institution of the archive, in the position, the
    auto-position or the hetero-position of the One and of the Unique,
    in the nomological /arkhē/. And the death drive. Without this evil,
    which is also /archive fever/, the desire and the disorder of the
    archive, there would be neither assignation nor consignation. "[1]
    <#eID1>

Hauntology - the truth is spectral

    "The structure of the archive is /spectral/. It is spectral /a
    priori/: neither present nor absent "in the flesh," neither visible
    nor invisible, a trace always referring to another whose eyes can
    never be met, no more than those of Hamlet's father, thanks to the
    possibility of a visor. Also, the spectral motif stages this
    disseminating fission from which the archontic principle, and the
    concept of the archive, and the concept in general suffer, from the
    principle on... [Addressing a phantom] is a law of economy, once
    again, a law of the /oikos/, the transaction of signs and values,
    but also of some familial domesticity: haunting implies places, a
    habitation, and always a haunted house... there is a /truth of
    delusion/, a truth of insanity or of hauntedness. Analogous to that
    "historical truth" which Freud distinguishes, notably in /Moses/,
    from the "material truth," this truth is repressed or supressed. But
    it resists and /returns/, as such, as the spectral truth of delusion
    or of hauntedness. It /returns/, it belongs, it comes down to
    spectral truth. Delusion or insanity, hauntedness is not only
    haunted by this or that ghost, Gradiva for example, but by the
    specter of the truth which has been thus repressed. The truth is
    spectral, and this is its part of truth which is irreducible by
    explanation... To decipher the archive of this score, to read its
    truth right on the monument of this portion, one must take into
    account a /prosthesis/, this "distorted substitute."... the
    /species/, the /aspect/, the /specter/, this is what remains to be
    seen with the truth, what is needed to speculate with the true of
    that truth. "[1] <#eID1>

idiomatism of the archive

    "the archive always holds a problem for translation. With the
    irreplaceable singularity of a document to interpret, to repeat, to
    reproduce, but each time in its original uniqueness, an archive
    ought to be idiomatic, and thus at once offered and unavailable for
    translation, open to and shielded from technical iteration and
    reproduction... "[1] <#eID1>

Mal d'archive

    "We are /en mal d'archive/: in need of archives... It is to burn
    with passion... to have a compulsive, repetitive, and nostalgic
    desire for the archive, an irrepressible desire to return to the
    origin, a homesickness, a nostalgia for the return to the most
    archaic place of absolute commencement. "[1] <#eID1>

First thesis: the psychic apparatus

    "an archive ... cannot be reduced to memory... neither under /mnēmē/
    nor under /anamnēsis/... [however, Freud holds] the technical
    prosthesis to be a secondary and accessory exteriority... The scene
    of excavation [in the study of histerya 1896, ] the ecstatic
    instant... when the very success of the dig must sign the effacement
    of the archivist" /the origin then speaks by itself/. The /arkhē/
    appears in the nude, without archive. It presents itself and
    comments on itself by itself. "Stones talk!" In the present.
    /Anamnēsis/ without /hypomnēsis/! [the archaeologist] /comes to
    efface itself/, it becomes transparent or unessential so as to let
    the /origin/ present itself in person. Live, without mediation and
    without delay. "[1] <#eID1>

Second thesis: the paradox of belief

    "the archive is made possible by the death, aggression, and
    destruction drive, that is to say also by originary finitude and
    expropriation... anarchiving destruction belongs to the process of
    archivization and produces the very thing it reduces... Freud claims
    not to believe in death and above all in the virtual existence of
    the specetral space which he nonetheless takes into account... He
    wants to think through the grain of truth of this belief, but he
    believes that one cannot not believe in them and that one ought not
    to believe in them. Belief, the radical phenomenon of believing, the
    only relationship possible to the other as other, does not in the
    end have any possible place, any irreducible status in Freudian
    psychoanalysis. Which it nonetheless makes possible... phantoms
    speak for the duration of the archaeological digs but finishes by
    exorcising them in the moment he at last says, the work having been
    terminated (or supposed to have been) "Stones talk!" "[1] <#eID1>

Third thesis: archontic (patriarchic) principle

    "the archontic principle of the archive, which in itself presupposes
    not the originary /arkhē/, but the nomological /arkhē/ of the law,
    of institution, of domiciliation, of filiation. No one has analyzed,
    that is to say, deconstructed, the authority of the archongic
    principle better than [Freud]. No one has shown how this archontic,
    that is, paternal and patriarchic, principle only posited itself to
    repeat itself and returned to re-posit itself only in the parricide.
    "[1] <#eID1>


        Différance

1. Deconstruction of logocentrism

    "[/epistēmē/:] truth as the unity of /logos/ and /phonē/.
    Repression, as Freud says..., contains an interior representation,
    laying out within itself a space of repression.... The relationship
    between /phonē/ and consciousness [Logo-phonocentrism is]
    necessarily finite, movement and structure: the history of the
    possibility of symbolism /in general/... the history of
    /différance/, history as /différance/ which finds in philosophy as
    /epistēmē/, in the European form of the metaphysical or
    onto-theological project, the privileged manifestation, with
    worldwide dominance, of dissimiulation, of general censorship of the
    text in general. "[2] <#eID2>

2. justification of a theoretical reticence to use Freudian concepts...

    "all these [Freudian] concepts [like repression?] belong to the
    history of metaphysics... the system of logocentric repression which
    was organized in order to exclude... the body of the written trace
    as a didactic and technical metaphor, as servile matter or
    excrement... logocentric repression permits an understanding of how
    an original and individual repression became possible within the
    horizon of a culture and a historical structure of belonging.... The
    necessity of an explicit question concerning the meaning of presence
    in general... the epoch of presence, in the Heideggerian sense, and
    its central support, from Decartes to Hegel: presence as
    consciousness, self-presence conceived within the opposition of
    consciousness to unconsciousness. The concepts of archi-trace and of
    /différance/: why they are neither Freudian nor Heideggerian...
    /Différance/, the pre-opening of the ontic-ontological difference...
    the difference between the pleasure principle and the reality
    principle, for example, is not uniquely, not primarily, a
    distinction, an exteriority, but rather the original possibility,
    within life, of the detour, of defferal... and the original
    possibility of the economy of death. /Différance/ and identity.
    /Différance/ within the economy of the same. The necessity of
    withdrawing the concepts of trace and of /différance/ from all
    classical conceptual oppositions. Necessity of the concept of
    archi-trace and the erasure of the archia. This erasure, which
    maintains the legibility of the archia, signifies a /conceived/
    relationship of belonging to the history of metaphisics. "[2] <#eID2>

writing and difference

    "[writing] Psychical /content/ will be /represented/ by a text whose
    essence is irreducibly graphic. The /structure/ of the psychical
    /apparatus/ will be /represented/ by a writing machine... we shall
    have to ask what the imitation, projected and liberated in a
    machine, of something like psychical writing might mean... what is a
    text, and what must the psyche be if it can be represented by a
    text? For if there is neither machine nor text without psychical
    origin, there is no domain of the psychic without text. [difference]
    Finally, what must be the relationship between psyche, writing, and
    spacing for such a metaphoric transition to be possible, not only,
    nor primarily, within theoretical discourse, but within the history
    of psyche, text, and technology? "[2] <#eID2>

Memory, quantity, quality, apparatus, psyche

    "... a writing machine of marvelous complexity into which the whole
    of the psychical apparatus will be projected... Breaching
    [/Bahnung/; derived from Bahn, road, and literally means
    pathbreaking. Derrida's translation of /Bahnung/ is /frayage/... /se
    frayer un chemin/... it is clumsy, but it is crucial to maintain the
    sense of the /force/ that breaks open a pathway, and the /space/
    opened by this force], the tracing of a trail, opens up a conducting
    path. Which presupposes a certain violence and a certain resistance
    to effraction. The path is broken, cracked, /fracta/, breached. Now
    there would be two kinds of neurones: the permeable neurones, which
    offer no resistance and thus retain no trace of impression
    [perceptual neurones]; other neurones, which would oppose
    contact-barriers to the quantity of excitation, would thus retain
    the printed trace: they "thus afford a possibility of representing
    (/darzustellen/) memory". This is the first representation, the
    first staging of memory. (/Darstellung/ is representation in the
    weak sense of the word, but also frequently in the sense of visual
    depiction, and sometimes of theatrical performance...) Memory, thus,
    is not a psychical property among others; it is the very essence of
    the psyche: resistance, and precisely, thereby, an opening to the
    effraction of the trace. ... simple opposition of quantity and
    quality... It is the difference between breaches which is the true
    origin of memory, and thus of the psyche. ...Trace as memory... the
    ungraspable and invisible difference between breaches... the
    difference within the exertion of forces. ... That quantity becomes
    /psychē/ and /mnēmē/ through differences rather than through
    plenitudes... /Repetition/ adds no quantity of present force, no
    /intensity/; it reproduces the same impression –yet it has the power
    of breaching. "[2] <#eID2>


        Repetition

Economy of Death

    "Is it not already death at the origin of a life which can defend
    itself against death only through an /economy/ of death, through
    deferment, repetition, reserve? For repetition does not /happend to/
    an initial impression; its possibility is already there, in the
    resistance offered /the first time/ by the psychical neurones... the
    /first time/ of the contact between /two/ forces, repetition has
    begun. Life is already threatened by the origin of the memory which
    constitutes it, and by the breaching which it resists, the
    effraction which it can contain only by repeating it... there is no
    breaching without a beginning of pain... But beyond a certain
    quantity, pain, the threatening origin of the psyche, must be
    deffered, like death, for it can "ruin" psychical "organization."
    "[2] <#eID2>


        Writing

Dream, Unconscious, content/context, writing

    "Freud doubtless conceives of the dream as a displacement similar to
    an original form of writing... the proper sense of the word –a
    script which is coded and visible "in the world"– would only be the
    metaphor of psychical writing... it works, no doubt, with a mass of
    elements which have been codified in the course of an individual or
    collective history. But in its operations, lexicon, and syntax a
    purely idiomatic residue is irreducible and is made to bear the
    burden of interpretation in the communication between
    unconsciousnesses. The dreamer invents his own grammar. No
    meaningful material or prerequisite text exists which he might
    /simply use/... This limitation is a function of an excessive
    preoccupation with /content/, and an insufficient concern for
    relations, locations, processes, and differences... context...
    Unconscious experience... produces its own signifiers; does not
    create them in their materiality, of course, but produces their
    status-as-meaningful (/signifiance/). "[2] <#eID2>

Text, Presence, Deferral

    "Originary writing, if there is one, must produce the space and the
    materiality of the sheet itself. ... If we consider first verbal
    expression, as it is circumscribed in the dream, we observe that its
    sonority, the materiality of the expression, does not disappear
    before the signified, or at least cannot be traversed and
    transgressed as it is in conscious speech. It acts as such, with the
    efficacy Artaud assigned it on the stage of cruelty. The materiality
    of a word cannot be translated or carried over into another
    language. Materiality is precisely that which translation
    relinquishes. To relinquish materiality: such is the driving force
    of translation. And when that materiality is reinstated, translation
    becomes poetry. ... Dreams are untranslatable... There is no present
    text in general, and there is not even a past present text, a text
    which is past as having been present. The text is not conceivable in
    an originary or modified form of presence. The unconscious text is
    already a weave of pure traces, differences in which meaning and
    force are united –a text nowhere present, consisting of archives
    which are /always already/ transcriptions. Originary prints.
    Everything begins with reproduction. Always already: repositories of
    a meaning which was never present, whose signified presence is
    always reconstituted by deferral, /nachträglich/, belatedly,
    /supplementarily/: for the /nachträglich/ also means
    /supplementary/. "[2] <#eID2>

Labor of writing

    "That the present in general is not primal but, rather,
    reconstituted, that it is not the absolute, wholly living form which
    constitutes experience, that there is no purity of the living
    present –such is the theme, formidable for metaphysics, which Freud,
    in a conceptual scheme unequal to the thing itselfe, would have us
    pursue.... Since consciousness for Freud is a surface exposed to the
    external world... we must... understand the possibility of a writing
    advanced as conscious and as acting in the world (the visible
    exterior of the graphism, of the literal, of the literal becoming
    literary, etc.) in terms of the labor of the writing which
    circulated like psychical energy between the unconscious and the
    conscious... a space of psychical writing (... of trascendental
    writing in the evenr that, along with Husserl, we would see the
    psyche as a region of the world... as the labor of writing erases
    the trascendental distinction between the origin of the world and
    Being-in-the-world. Erases it while producing it: the medium of the
    dialogue and misunderstanding between the Husserlian and
    Heideggerian concepts of Being-in-the-world.) "[2] <#eID2>

Force and meaning; metaphysics of consciousness and of presence;
presence in the word; metaphysics of preconsciousness (for Freud, the
verbal)

    "Force produces meaning (and space) throught the power of
    "repetition" alone, which inhabits it originarily as its death. This
    power, that is, this lack of power, which opens and limits the labor
    of force, institutes translatability, makes possible what we call
    "language," transforms an absolute idiom into a limit which is
    always already transgressed: a pure idiom is not language; it
    becomes so only through repetition; repetition always already
    divides the point of departure of the first time. ...all that Freud
    invites to think concerning writing as "breaching" in the
    /psychical/ repetition of this previously /neurological/ notion:
    opening up of its own space, effraction, breaking of a path against
    resistances, rupture and irruption becoming a route (/rupta, via
    rupta/), violent inscription of a form, tracing of a difference in a
    nature or a matter which are conceivable as such only in their
    /opposition/ to writing... the /itinerant/ work of the trace,
    producing and following its route, the trace which traces, the trace
    which breaks open its own path. The metaphor of pathbreaking, so
    frequently used in Freud's descriptions, is always in communication
    with the theme of the /supplementary delay/ and with the
    reconstitution of meaning through deferral, after a mole-like
    progression, after the subterranean toil of an impression. "[2] <#eID2>


        Work

    "A work of art, therefore , is a complete and closed form in its
    uniqueness as a balanced organic whole, while at the same time
    constituting an open product on account of its susceptibility to
    countless different interprpetations which do not impinge on its
    unadulterable specificity. Hence every reception of a work of art is
    both an interpretation and a performance of it, because in every
    reception the work takes on a fresh perspective for itself. "[19]
    <#eID19>


      Bibliography

[0] Žižek, Slavoj. /The Parallax View/. 2006. MIT Press.

[1] Derrida, Jacques. /Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression/. 1995. John
Hopkins University Press.

[2] Derrida, Jacques. /Writing and Difference/., in //. Alan Bass (Ed.)
1978. The University of Chicago.

[3] Agamben, Giorgio. /Nymphs/., in /Releasing the Image - From
Literature to New Media/. Khalip, Jacques and Mitchell, Robert (Ed.)
2011. Stanford University Press.

[4] Alberro, Alexander. /Periodising Contemporary Art/., in /Theory in
Contemporary Art since 1985/. Kocur, Zoya and Leung, Simon (Ed.) 2012.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

[5] Barras and Vickers, . /Sonification Design and Aesthetics/., in /The
Sonification Handbook/. Hermann, Hunt and Neuhoff (Ed.) 2011. Logos.

[6] Barrass, Stephen. /The aesthetic turn in sonification towards a
social and cultural medium/. 2012. Springer-Verlag London Limited.

[7] Benjamin, Walter. /Theses on the Philosophy of History/., in //.
Hanna Arendt (Ed.) 1968. Library of Congress.

[8] Bishop, Claire. /Antagonism and Relational Aesthetics/., in /Theory
in Contemporary Art since 1985/. Kocur, Zoya and Leung, Simon (Ed.)
2012. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

[9] Bohn, James Matthew. /The Music of American Composer Lejaren Hiller
and an Examination of His Early Works Involving Technology/. 2004. Edwin
Mellen Press.

[10] Born, Georgina. /Rationalizing Culture/. 1995. University of
California Press.

[11] Burks, A.W, Goldstine, H.H, von Neumann, J., . /Preliminary
Discussion of the Logical Design of an Electronic Computing Instrument/.
1946. .

[12] Cascone, Kim. /The Aesthetics of Failure: 'Post-Digital' Tendencies
in Contemporary Computer Music/., in /Audio Culture: Readings in Modern
Music/. Cox, Christoph and Warner, Daniel (Ed.) 2004. Continuum.

[13] Chion, Michel. /Audio-Vision/. 1994. Columbia University Press.

[14] Daniel, Sharon. /Collaborative Systems: Redefining Public Art/., in
/Context Providers: Conditions of Meaning in Media Arts/. Lovejoy, M.,
Vesna, V., Paul, C. (Ed.) 2011. Intellect Ltd..

[15] Daniel, Sharon. /The Database: An Aesthetics of Dignity/., in
/Database Aesthetics: art in the age of information/. Vesna, Victoria
(Ed.) 2007. University of Minessotta Press.

[16] Dietz, Steve. /Learning From Eno/., in /Brian Eno: Visual Music/.
Scoates, Christoph (Ed.) 2013. Chronicle Books LLC.

[17] Dietz, Steve. /Steina 1970-2000/. 2008. Santa Fe.

[18] Dyson, George. /Turing's Cathedral: The Origins of the Digital
Universe/. 2012. Pantheon Books.

[19] Eco, Umberto. /The Poetics of The Open Work/., in /Audio Culture:
Readings in Modern Music/. Cox, Christoph and Warner, Daniel (Ed.) 2004.
Continuum.

[20] Fisher, Jean. /The Syncretic Turn: Cross-Cultural Practices in the
Age of Multiculturalism/. . .

[21] Geimer, Peter. /Self-Generated Images/., in /Releasing the Image -
From Literature to New Media/. Khalip, Jacques and Mitchell, Robert
(Ed.) 2011. Stanford University Press.

[22] Graham, Beryl and Cook, Sarah, . /Rethinking Curating - Art After
New Media/., in //. Graham, Beryl and Cook, Sarah (Ed.) 2010. MIT Pess.

[23] Grusin, Richard. /Introduction/., in /The Nonhuman Turn/. Grusin,
Richard (Ed.) 2015. University of Minessotta Press.

[24] Hansen, Mark. /From Fixed to Fluid: Material-Mental Images Between
Neural Synchronization and Computational Mediation/., in /Releasing the
Image - From Literature to New Media/. Khalip, Jacques and Mitchell,
Robert (Ed.) 2011. Stanford University Press.

[25] Hansen, Mark. /Bodies in Code: Interfaces with Digital Media/.
2006. Routledge.

[26] Higgins, Dick. /Horizons, the Poetics and Theory of The
Intermedia/. 1984. Southern Illinois University Press.

[27] Hiller, L. A. and Isaacson, L. M. , . /Experimental Music:
Composition With an Electronic Computer/. 1959. McGraw-Hill Book
Company, Inc..

[28] Horkheimer and Adorno, . /Dialectic Of Enlightenment/. 1944. Social
Studies Association, Inc. New York.

[29] Klein, Norman M.. /Waiting for the World to Explode: How Data
Convert into a Novel/., in /Database Aesthetics: art in the age of
information/. Vesna, Victoria (Ed.) 2007. University of Minessotta Press.

[30] Kocur and Leung, . /Introduction to Part I/., in /Theory in
Contemporary Art since 1985/. Kocur, Zoya and Leung, Simon (Ed.) 2012.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

[31] Kyong Chun, Wendi Hui. /Introduction: Did Somebody Say New
Media?/., in /New Media, Old Media - A History and Theory Reader/. Kyong
Chun, Wendy Hui and Watkins Fisher, Anna (Ed.) 2016. Routledge.

[32] Landow, George P.. /Hypertext 2.0/. 1997. Baltimore: The Johns
Hopkins University Press, .

[33] Latour, Bruno. /On actor-network theory. A few clarifications plus
more than a few complications/., in /Philosophia/. Olesen, Finn (Ed.)
Vol. 25 No. 3 1990. .

[34] Lewis, George. /Too many notes: Computers, Complexity, and Culture
in Voyager/. 2000. MIT Pess.

[35] Lovejoy, Margot. /Defining Conditions for Digital Arts: Social
Function, Authorship, and Audience/., in /Context Providers: Conditions
of Meaning in Media Arts/. Lovejoy, M., Vesna, V., Paul, C. (Ed.) 2011.
Intellect Ltd..

[36] Lovejoy, Margot. /Digital Currents: art in the electronic age/.
2004. Routledge.

[37] Manning, Peter. /Electronic and Computer Music/. 2013. Oxford
Univeristy Press.

[38] Manovich, Lev. /Image Future/., in /The Machinima Reader/. Lowood,
Henry and Nitsche, Michael (Ed.) 2011. MIT Pess.

[39] Manovich, Lev. /Database as symbolic form/., in /Database
Aesthetics: art in the age of information/. Vesna, Victoria (Ed.) 2007.
University of Minessotta Press.

[40] Manovich, Lev. /Old Media as New Media: Cinema/., in /The New Media
Book/. Harries, Dan (Ed.) 2002. BFI. Pub..

[41] Manovich, Lev. /The Language of New Media/. 2001. MIT Press.

[42] Manovich, Lev. /There Is Only Software/., in /Vision Anew - the
Lens and Screen Arts/. Bell, Adam and Traub, Charles H. (Ed.) 2015.
University of California Press.

[43] Mathews, Max. /The Csound Book: Perspectives in Software Synthesis,
Sound Design, Signal Processing, and Programming/., in //. Boulanger, R.
(Ed.) 2000. MIT Press.

[44] McLuhan, Marshall. /Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man/.
1964. The New American Library, Inc..

[45] Melaney, William D.. /Arendt’s Revision of Praxis: On Plurality and
Narrative Experience./., in /Annalecta Husserliana/. A.-T. Tymieniecka
(Ed.) Vol. XC 2006. Springer.

[46] Mitchel, R. and Khalip, J., . /Introduction:
Release–(Non-)Orignation–Concepts/., in /Releasing the Image - From
Literature to New Media/. Khalip, Jacques and Mitchell, Robert (Ed.)
2011. Stanford University Press.

[47] Morton, Timothy. /Humankind/. 2017. Verso.

[48] Murray, Timothy. /Imaging Sound in New Media Art: Asia Acoustics,
Distributed/., in /Releasing the Image - From Literature to New Media/.
Khalip, Jacques and Mitchell, Robert (Ed.) 2011. Stanford University Press.

[49] Nancy, Jean-Luc. /Listening/. 2007. Fordham University Place.

[50] Neidich, Warren. /Blow-Up: Photography, Cinema and The Brain/.
2003. D.A.P. and the University of California.

[51] Oliver La Rosa, Jaime. /Código Abierto | Obra Abierta. El efecto de
las prácticas de intercambio de código en la composición de música./.,
in /Canto Electroacústico: Aves Latinoamericanas En Una Creación
Colaborativa/. Rodríguez Leal, Luis Germán and Izarra, Adina (Ed.) 2012.
Ariel, S.A.

[52] Passmann, J. and Boersma, A., . /Unknowing Algorithms. On
Transparency of Unopenable Black Boxes/., in /The Datafied Society:
Studying Culture through Data/. Schäfer, M. T. and van Es, Karin (Ed.)
2017. Amsterdan University Press.

[53] Paul, Christiane. /Digital Art/. 2008. Thames & Hudson.

[54] Paul, Christiane. /The Database as System and Cultural Form:
Anatomies of Cultural Narratives/., in /Database Aesthetics: art in the
age of information/. Vesna, Victoria (Ed.) 2007. University of
Minessotta Press.

[55] Polli, Andrea. /Sonifications of Global Environmental Data/., in
/Environmental Sound Artists: In their own words/. Bianchi, Frederick
and Manzo, V.J. (Ed.) 2016. Oxford University Press.

[56] Roads, Curtis. /Microsound/. 2004. MIT Pess.

[57] Roads, Curtis. /Composing Electronic Music: A New Aesthetic/. 2015.
Oxford University Press.

[58] Sack, Warren. /Aesthetics of Information Visualization/., in
/Context Providers: Conditions of Meaning in Media Arts/. Lovejoy, M.,
Vesna, V., Paul, C. (Ed.) 2011. Intellect Ltd..

[59] Schäfer, M. T. and van Es, Karin, . /New Brave World/., in /The
Datafied Society: Studying Culture through Data/. Schäfer, M. T. and van
Es, Karin (Ed.) 2017. Amsterdan University Press.

[60] Seaman, Bill. /Recombinant Poetics and Related Database
Aesthetics/., in /Database Aesthetics: art in the age of information/.
Vesna, Victoria (Ed.) 2007. University of Minessotta Press.

[61] Simons, Jan. /Old Media as New Media: Television/., in /The New
Media Book/. Harries, Dan (Ed.) 2002. BFI. Pub..

[62] Stiles and Shanken, . /Missing in Action: Agency and Meaning in
Interactive Art/., in /Context Providers: Conditions of Meaning in Media
Arts/. Lovejoy, M., Vesna, V., Paul, C. (Ed.) 2011. Intellect Ltd..

[63] Toop, David. /The Generation Game: Experimental Music and Digital
Culture/., in /Audio Culture: Readings in Modern Music/. Cox, Christoph
and Warner, Daniel (Ed.) 2004. Continuum.

[64] Turing, Alan M.. /On Computable Numbers, With An Application To The
Entscheidungsproblem/. 1936. .

[65] Vaggione, Horacio. /Determinism and the false collective about
models of time in early computer-aided composition/. 1993. Hardwood
Academic Publishers.

[66] van Dijck, Jose. /Foreword/., in /The Datafied Society: Studying
Culture through Data/. Schäfer, M. T. and van Es, Karin (Ed.) 2017.
Amsterdan University Press.

[67] Varese, Edgar. /The Liberation of Sound/., in /Audio Culture:
Readings in Modern Music/. Cox, Christoph and Warner, Daniel (Ed.) 2004.
Continuum.

[68] Vesna, Victoria. /Seeing the world in a grain of sand: the database
aesthetics of everything/., in /Database Aesthetics: art in the age of
information/. Vesna, Victoria (Ed.) 2007. University of Minessotta Press.

[69] Vesna, Victoria. /Introduction/., in /Database Aesthetics: art in
the age of information/. Vesna, Victoria (Ed.) 2007. University of
Minessotta Press.

[70] von Neumann, John. /First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC/. 1945.
Moore School of Electrical Engineering. University of Pensylvania.

[71] Weinbren, Grahame. /Ocean, Database, Recut/., in /Database
Aesthetics: art in the age of information/. Vesna, Victoria (Ed.) 2007.
University of Minessotta Press.

[72] Wolff, Janet. /The Social Production of Art/. 1981. NYU Press.

[73] Xenakis, Iannis. /Formalized Music: Thought and Mathematics in
Music/. 1992. Pendragon Revised Edition.

[74] zzzzzz, zzzzzz. /zzzzzz/. . .

